--- PAGE 441 ---
24. Instrument, Drum and Effect Racks
Inside An Audio Effect Rack.
A Rack is a flexible tool for working with effects, plug-ins and instruments in a track’s device chain.
Racks can be used to build complex signal processors, dynamic performance instruments, stacked
synthesizers and more. Yet they also streamline your device chain by bringing together your most
essential controls. While Racks excel at handling multiple devices, they can extend the abilities of
even a single device by defining new control relationships between its parameters.
24. 1 An Overview of Racks
24. 1. 1 Signal Flow and Parallel Device Chains
Inside An Audio Effect Rack.
In any of Live’s tracks, devices are connected serially in a device chain, passing their signals from one
device to the next, left to right. By default, the Device View displays only a single chain, but there is
actually no limit to the number of chains contained within a track.
Racks allow (among other things) additional device chains to be added to any track. When a track
has multiple chains, they operate in parallel: In Instrument and Effect Racks, each chain receives the
same input signal at the same time, but then processes its signal serially through its own devices. The
output of each of the parallel chains is mixed together, producing the Rack’s output.
441

--- PAGE 442 ---
Drum Racks also allow multiple parallel chains to be used simultaneously, but their chains process
input somewhat differently: Rather than receiving the same input signals, each Drum Rack chain
receives input from only a single assigned MIDI note.
The entire contents of any Rack can be thought of as a single device. This means that adding a new
Rack at any point in a device chain is no different than adding any other device, and Racks can
contain any number of other Racks. If more devices are placed after a Rack in a track’s device chain,
the Rack’s output is passed on to them, as usual.
24. 1.2 Macro Controls
The Macro Controls.
One unique property of Racks are their Macro Controls.
The Macro Controls are a bank of knobs, each capable of addressing any number of parameters
from any devices in a Rack. How you use them is up to you — whether it be for convenience, by
making an important device parameter more accessible; for defining exotic, multi-parameter morphs
of rhythm and timbre; or for constructing a mega-synth, and hiding it away behind a single
customized interface. See Using the Macro Controls for a detailed explanation of how to do this.
For the greatest degree of expression, try MIDI-mapping the Macro Controls to an external control
surface.
442

--- PAGE 443 ---
24.2 Creating Racks
Four Rack variants cover the range of Live’s devices: Instrument Racks, Drum Racks, Audio Effect Racks
and MIDI Effect Racks. Just as with track types, each kind of Rack has rules regarding the devices it
contains:
MIDI Effect Racks contain only MIDI effects, and can only be placed in MIDI tracks.
Audio Effect Racks contain only audio effects, and can be placed in audio tracks. They can also
be placed in MIDI tracks, as long as they are “downstream“ from an instrument.
Instrument Racks contain instruments, but can additionally contain both MIDI and audio effects.
In this case, all MIDI effects have to be at the beginning of the Instrument Rack’s device chain,
followed by an instrument, and then any audio effects.
Drum Racks are similar to Instrument Racks; they can contain instruments as well as MIDI and
audio effects and their devices must be ordered according to the same signal flow rules. Drum
Racks can also contain up to six return chains of audio effects, with independent send levels for
each chain in the main Rack.
There are different ways to create Racks. A new, empty Rack can be created by dragging a generic
Rack preset (“Audio Effect Rack,“ for example) from the browser into a track. Devices can then be
dropped directly into the Rack’s Chain List or Devices view, which are introduced in the next section.
If a track already has one or more devices that you would like to group into a Rack, then simply select
the title bars of those devices in the Device View, and right-click on one of the title bars to reveal the 
Group and Group to Drum Rack commands in the context menu. Note that if you repeat this
command again on the same device, you will create a Rack within a Rack. You can also group
multiple chains within a Rack using the same procedure. Doing this also creates a Rack within a Rack.
In the Device View, the contents of Racks are always contained between end brackets: Just as with
punctuation or in mathematics, a Rack within a Rack will have a pair of brackets within a pair of
brackets.
To ungroup devices, dismantling their Racks, select the Rack’s title bar, and then use the Edit menu or
the context menu to access the Ungroup command.
• 
• 
• 
• 
443

--- PAGE 444 ---
24.3 Looking at Racks
Components of an Effect Rack.
Components of a Drum Rack.
Racks have distinct views that can be shown or hidden as needed. Therefore, every Rack has a 
view column on its far left side that holds the corresponding view selectors. The actual view
selectors available differ depending on whether an Instrument, Drum or Effect Rack is being
used.
Macro Controls
Chain List - In Drum Racks, this view can include both drum chains and return chains.
Devices
Racks are also identifiable by their round corners, which bracket and enclose their content.
When the Devices view is shown, the end bracket visually detaches itself to keep the Rack
hierarchy clear.
Pad View - This is unique to Drum Racks.
To move, copy or delete an entire Rack at once, simply select it by its title bar (as opposed to the title
bars of any devices that it contains). When selected, a Rack can also be renamed by using the Edit
menu’s Rename command. You can also enter your own info text for a Rack via the Edit Info Text
command in the Edit menu or in the Racks’s context menu.
When all of a Rack’s views are hidden, its title bar will fold into the view column, making the entire
Rack as slim as possible. This has the same effect as choosing Fold from the context menu or double-
clicking on the Rack’s title bar.
If you would like to locate a particular device in a Rack without searching manually through its entire
contents, you will appreciate this navigation shortcut: right-click on the Device View selector, and a
hierarchical list of all devices in the track’s device chain will appear. Simply select an entry from the
list, and Live will select that device and move it into view for you.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
444

--- PAGE 445 ---
Navigate Racks Quickly Via a Context Menu.
24.4 Chain List
The Chain List in an Audio Effect Rack.
As signals enter a Rack, they are first greeted by the Chain List. We will therefore also choose this
point for our own introduction.
The Chain List represents the branching point for incoming signals: Each parallel device chain starts
here, as an entry in the list. Below the list is a drop area, where new chains can be added by
dragging and dropping presets, devices, or even pre-existing chains.
445

--- PAGE 446 ---
Note: Racks, chains and devices can be freely dragged into and out of other Racks, and even
between tracks. Selecting a chain, then dragging and hovering over another Session or Arrangement
View track will give that track focus; its Device View will open, allowing you to drop your chain into
place.
Since the Device View can show only one device chain at a time, the Chain List also serves as a
navigational aid: The list selection determines what will be shown in the adjacent Devices view (when
enabled). Try using your computer keyboard’s up and down arrow keys to change the selection in the
Chain List, and you’ll find that you can quickly flip through the contents of a Rack.
The Chain List also supports multi-selection of chains, for convenient copying, organizing and
regrouping. In this case, the Devices view will indicate how many chains are currently selected.
Each chain has its own Chain Activator, as well as Solo and Hot-Swap buttons. Chains in Instrument,
Drum and Audio Effect Racks also have their own volume and pan sliders, and Drum Rack chains
have additional send level and MIDI assignment controls. Like Live Clips, entire chains can be saved
and recalled as presets in the browser. You can give a chain a descriptive name by selecting it, then
choosing the Edit menu’s Rename command. You can also enter your own info text for a chain via the
Edit Info Text command in the Edit menu or in the chain’s context menu. The context menu also contains
a color palette where you can choose a custom chain color.
24.4. 1 Auto Select
Auto Select in an Audio Effect Rack.
When the Auto Select switch is activated, every chain that is currently processing signals becomes
selected in the Chain List. In Drum Racks, this feature will select a chain if it receives its assigned MIDI
446

--- PAGE 447 ---
input note. In Instrument and Effect Racks, Auto Select works in conjunction with zones, which are
discussed next, and is quite helpful when troubleshooting complex configurations.
24.5 Zones
Zones are sets of data filters that reside at the input of every chain in an Instrument or Effect Rack.
Together, they determine the range of values that can pass through to the device chain. By default,
zones behave transparently, never requiring your attention. They can be reconfigured, however, to
form sophisticated control setups. The three types of zones, whose editors are toggled with the buttons
above the Chain List, are Key, Velocity, and Chain Select. The adjacent Hide button whisks them out
of sight.
Note: Audio Effect Racks do not have key or velocity zones, since these two zone types filter MIDI
data only. Likewise, Drum Racks have no zones at all; they filter MIDI notes based on choosers in their
chain lists.
Zones contain a lower, main section, used for resizing and moving the zone itself, and a narrow
upper section that defines fade ranges. Resizing of either section is done by clicking and dragging on
its right or left edges, while moving is accomplished by clicking and dragging a zone from anywhere
except its edges.
24.5. 1 Signal Flow through Zones
To understand how zones work, let’s examine the signal flow in a MIDI Effect Rack. Our MIDI Effect
Rack resides in the device chain of a MIDI track, and therefore processes MIDI signals. We will
assume that it contains four parallel device chains, each containing one MIDI effect.
All MIDI data in the track is passed to its device chain, and therefore into the input of the MIDI
Effect Rack.
Our MIDI Effect Rack has four device chains, all of which receive the same MIDI data at the
same time.
Before any MIDI data can enter a device chain, it must be able to pass through every zone in
that chain. Every chain in a MIDI Effect Rack has three zones: a key zone, a velocity zone and
a chain select zone.
An incoming MIDI note gets compared to a chain’s key zone. If the MIDI note lies within the
key zone, it is passed to the next zone for comparison; if it does not, then we already know that
the note will not be passed to that chain’s devices.
The same comparisons are made for the chain’s velocity and chain select zones. If a note also
lies within both of these zones, then it is passed to the input of the first device in that chain.
The output of all parallel chains is mixed together to produce the MIDI Effect Rack’s final output.
If there happened to be another device following after the Rack in the track’s device chain, it
would now receive the Rack’s output for processing.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
447

--- PAGE 448 ---
24.5.2 Key Zones
The Key Zone Editor.
When the Key button is selected, the Key Zone Editor appears to the right of the Chain List, illustrating
how each chain maps to the full MIDI note range (nearly 1 1 octaves). Chains will only respond to
MIDI notes that lie within their key zone. The zones of individual chains may occupy any number of
keys, allowing for flexible “keyboard split“ setups.
Key zone fade ranges attenuate the velocities of notes entering a chain.
24.5.3 Velocity Zones
The Velocity Zone Editor.
Each chain in an Instrument Rack or MIDI Effect Rack also has a velocity zone, specifying the range of
MIDI Note On velocities that it will respond to.
The Velocity Zone Editor, when displayed, replaces the Key Zone Editor to the right of the Chain List.
MIDI Note On velocity is measured on a scale of 1-1 27 , and this value range spans the top of the
editor. Otherwise, the functionality here is identical to that of the Key Zone Editor.
Velocity zone fade ranges attenuate the velocities of notes entering a chain.
448

--- PAGE 449 ---
24.5.4 Chain Select Zones
The Chain Select Editor.
Activating the Chain button in an Instrument or Effect Rack displays the Chain Select Editor. These
Racks have chain select zones, which allow you to filter chains spontaneously via a single parameter.
The editor has a scale of 0-1 27 , similar to the Velocity Zone Editor. Above the value scale, however,
you will find a draggable indicator known as the Chain selector.
The chain select zone is a data filter just like the other zones; although all chains in a Rack receive
input signals, only those with chain select zones that overlap the current value of the Chain selector
can be addressed and thereby produce output.
By default, the chain select zones of Instrument and MIDI Effect Racks filter only notes, ignoring all
other incoming MIDI events (such as MIDI CCs). To filter all MIDI events, enable the Chain Selector
Filters MIDI Ctrl option, available in the context menu of a Rack’s Chain Select Ruler.
In MIDI Effect Racks, fade ranges attenuate the velocities of notes entering a chain. In Instrument
Racks and Audio Effect Racks, which both output audio signals, fade ranges attenuate the volume
level at each chain’s output. So what happens, then, if the Chain selector is moved outside of the chain
select zone where a sound is currently playing? If the zone ends in a fade range, the chain’s output
volume is attenuated to zero while the Chain selector is outside of the zone. If the zone had no fade
range, the output volume is not attenuated, allowing the chain’s effects (like long reverb tails or
delays) to fade out according to their own settings.
Let’s consider how we can make use of chain select zones in a performance situation:
449

--- PAGE 450 ---
24.5.4. 1 Making Preset Banks Using Chain Select
Using Chain Select Zones to Create Effects Presets.
Unlike the other zone types, the default length of a chain select zone is 1, and the default value is 0.
From this setup, we can quickly create “preset banks“ using the Chain Select Editor.
Again, we will use a Rack with four chains as our starting point. Each of the four chains contain
different effects that we would like to be able to switch between. To make this a “hands-on“
experience, we have MIDI-mapped the Chain selector to an encoder on an external control surface.
Let’s move the chain select zones of the second and third chains so that each of our zones is
occupying its own adjacent value: The first chain’s zone has a value of 0, the second chain’s zone has
a value of 1, the third has a value of 2, and the fourth has a value of 3.
Since each of our chain select zones has a unique value, with no two zones overlapping, we now
have a situation where only one chain at a time can ever be equal to the Chain selector value (shown
at the top of the editor). Therefore, by moving the Chain selector, we determine which chain can
process signals. With our MIDI encoder at hand, we can now flip effortlessly between instrument or
effect setups.
24.5.4.2 Crossfading Preset Banks Using Fade Ranges
Crossfading Between Effects Presets Using Chain Select Zones.
450

--- PAGE 451 ---
Taking the previous example one step further, we can tweak our chain select zones to produce a
smooth transition between our “presets.“ To accomplish this, we will make use of our zones’ fade
ranges.
To create some room for fading, let’s extend the length of our zones a bit. Setting the zones as shown
maintains four exclusive values for our presets, so that each still has one point where neither of the
others are heard. We crossfade between the presets over eight steps. If this is too rough a transition for
your material, simply reposition the zones to maximize the fade ranges.
24.6 Drum Racks
We’ve already talked a bit about Drum Racks, and most of their features are the same as those found
in Instrument and Effect Racks. But Drum Racks have a slightly different layout, some unique controls
and special behavior that is optimized for creating drum kits.
The Chain List in a Drum Rack.
In addition to the standard selectors found on all Racks, Drum Racks have four additional
controls in the view column. From top to bottom, these are toggles for the Input/Output, Send,
and Return sections, and the Auto Select button.
Input/Output Section - The Receive chooser sets the incoming MIDI note to which the drum
chain will respond. The list shows note names, MIDI note numbers and standard GM drum
equivalents. The Play slider sets the outgoing MIDI note that will be sent to the devices in the
chain. The Choke chooser allows you to set a chain to one of sixteen choke groups. Any chains
that are in the same choke group will silence the others when triggered. This is useful for choking
open hihats by triggering closed ones, for example. If “All Notes“ is selected in the Receive
chooser, the Play and Choke choosers are disabled — in this case, the chain simply passes the
note that it receives to its devices. The small Preview button to the left of these choosers fires a
note into the chain, making it easy to check your mappings away from a MIDI controller.
Mixer Section - In addition to the mixer and Hot-Swap controls found in other Rack types,
Drum Racks also have send sliders. These sliders allow you to set the amount of post-fader
signal sent from each drum chain to any of the available return chains. Note that send controls
are not available until return chains have been created.
1. 
2. 
3. 
45 1

--- PAGE 452 ---
Return Chains - A Drum Rack’s return chains appear in a separate section at the bottom of the
chain list. Up to six chains of audio effects can be added here, which are fed by send sliders in
each of the drum chains above.
The Audio To chooser in the mixer for return chains allows you to route a return chain’s output to either
the main output of the Rack or directly to the return tracks of the Set.
24.6. 1 Pad View
Pad View.
The Pad View is unique to Drum Racks and offers an easy way to map and manipulate samples and
devices. Each pad represents one of the 1 28 available MIDI notes. The pad overview to the left shifts
the set of visible pads up or down in groups of 16, either by dragging the view selector to a new area
or by using your computer keyboard’s up and down arrow keys. Use the Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac)
modifier to shift the view by single rows instead.
Almost any object from Live’s browser — samples, effects, instruments and presets — can be dragged
onto a pad, mapping automatically to the pad’s note and creating or reconfiguring internal chains
and devices as necessary. Dropping a sample onto an empty pad, for example, creates a new chain
containing a Simpler, with the dropped sample ready to play from the pad’s note. If you then drag an
audio effect to the same pad, it is placed downstream from the Simpler in the same chain. To replace
4. 
452

--- PAGE 453 ---
the Simpler, simply drop another sample onto the same pad — any downstream audio effects or
upstream MIDI effects will be left intact and only the Simpler and sample will be replaced.
In addition to dragging objects from the browser, pads can also be filled quickly via Hot-Swap. If
you’re in Hot-Swap mode, pressing the D  key will toggle the Hot-Swap target between the Drum
Rack itself and the last selected pad.
If a multi-selection of samples is dropped onto a pad, new Simplers and chains will be mapped
upwards chromatically from this pad, replacing any other samples that may have already been
assigned to the pads in question (but, as before, leaving any effects devices alone). Alt (Win) / 
Cmd (Mac)-dragging a multi-selection layers all of the samples to a single pad, by creating a nested
Instrument Rack.
Dragging a pad to another pad swaps the note mapping between the pads. This means that any
MIDI clips triggering the affected notes will now play the “wrong“ sounds — although this might be
exactly what you want. Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac)-dragging one pad to another will layer any
chains from both pads in a nested Instrument Rack.
You can always change your mappings from within the chain list as well, by adjusting the Receive
choosers. The Pad View will update automatically to reflect your changes. If you set the same Receive
note for multiple chains, that note’s pad will trigger them all.
If you’re working with lots of nested Racks, the inner structure can quickly become complicated. Pad
View can make it much easier to work by letting you focus on only the top level: the notes and sounds.
It’s important to remember that a pad represents a note, rather than a chain. More specifically, it
represents all chains, no matter how deep in the Rack, that are able to receive that pad’s note. What
you can control with each pad is related to how many chains it represents:
An empty pad shows only the note it will trigger. When you mouse over it, the Status Bar will
display this note, as well as the suggested GM instrument.
A pad that triggers only one chain shows the name of the chain. In this case, the pad serves as
a handy front-end for many controls that are normally accessed in the chain list, such as mute,
solo, preview and Hot-Swap. You can also rename and delete the chain via the pad.
A pad that triggers multiple chains shows “Multi“ as its name, and its mute, solo and preview
buttons will affect all of its chains. If you mute and solo chains individually within the chain list,
the pad’s icons reflect this mixed state. Hot-Swap and renaming are disabled for a Multi pad,
but you can delete all of its chains at once.
Although Pad View is designed for easy editing and sound design, it also excels as a performance
interface, particularly when triggered by a hardware control surface with pads. If your pad controller
is one of Live’s natively supported control surfaces, simply select it as a control surface in the Link,
Tempo & MIDI tab of Live’s Settings. From then on, as long as you have a Drum Rack on a track that’s
receiving MIDI, your pad controller will trigger the pads that are visible on your screen. If you scroll
the pad overview to show a different set of pads, your controller will update automatically.
• 
• 
• 
453

--- PAGE 454 ---
24.7 Using the Macro Controls
It is possible to use up to 16 Macro Controls in a Rack. When creating a new Rack, eight Macro
Control knobs are shown by default. You can use the  and  view selector buttons to increase or
decrease the number of visible Macro Controls. Note that the state of shown and hidden Macro
Controls is saved in the Live Set.
These Selector Buttons Set the Number of Visible Macro Controls.
24.7 . 1 Map Mode
Making Macro Control Assignments in Map Mode.
454

--- PAGE 455 ---
With the potential for developing complex device chains, Macro Controls keep things manageable
by taking over the most essential parameters of a Rack (as determined by you, of course). Once you
have set up your ideal mapping, the rest of the Rack can be hidden away.
The Macro Control view’s dedicated Map button opens the door to this behavior. Enabling Macro
Map Mode causes three things to happen:
All mappable parameters from a Rack’s devices will appear with a colored overlay;
Map buttons will appear beneath each Macro Control dial;
The Mapping Browser (see ‘The Mapping Browser’) will open.
The following steps will get you started mapping:
Enable Macro Map Mode by clicking the Map mode button;
Select a device parameter for mapping by clicking it once;
Map the parameter by clicking on any Macro Control’s Map button. The details will be added
to the Mapping Browser. By default, the Macro Control will take its name and units from the
device parameter it is controlling.
Refine the value range if desired using the Min/Max sliders in the Mapping Browser. Inverted
mappings can be created by setting the Min slider’s value greater than the Max slider’s value.
The current values can also be inverted by right-clicking on the entry in the Mapping Browser
and selecting Invert Range.
Select another device parameter if you’d like to create more mappings, or click on the Map
mode button once more to exit Macro Map Mode.
Note that once assigned to a Macro Control, a device parameter will appear disabled, since it hands
over all control to the Macro Control (although it can still be modulated externally, via clip envelopes.
You can edit or delete your assignments at any time using the Mapping Browser (which only appears
when Map Mode is enabled).
If more than one parameter is assigned to a single Macro Control, the name of the control will revert
to its generic name (e.g., Macro 3). The Marco Control’s units will also change to a 0 to 1 27 scale,
except when all parameters possess both the same unit type and the same unit range.
Macro Controls can be given custom names, colors and info text entries via the corresponding
commands in the Edit menu or the context menu.
24.7 .2 Randomizing Macro Controls
If you want to add an element of surprise or find some inspiration in your Set, randomizing Macro
Controls can be a useful tool. You can randomize the values of all mapped Macro Controls in a Rack
by pressing the Rand button in that Rack’s title bar.
• 
• 
• 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
455

--- PAGE 456 ---
This Button Randomizes Macro Controls.
Depending on your material, you might only want to randomize some parameters, while leaving other
controls unchanged. To exclude a mapped Macro Control from randomization, enable the Exclude
Macro from Randomization option in the context menu. Note that Macro Controls assigned to Volume
parameters in Instrument Rack presets are excluded from randomization by default.
456

--- PAGE 457 ---
24.7 .3 Macro Control Variations
Macro Control Variations.
You can store different states of Macro Controls as individual presets (or “variations”). This is useful
when, for example, you want to capture the state of a Rack as a “snapshot” during a sound design
session, or audition different settings of a mapped Macro Control in an Audio Effect Rack made for
mixing. You can also use these variations or create builds and drops, or make instant jumps between
different Macro Control settings while recording or performing.
Clicking the Show/Hide Macro Variations view selector button opens a view where you can store,
manage and launch Macro Control variations.
457

--- PAGE 458 ---
This Selector Button Opens the Macro Control Variations View.
Pressing the New button stores the current state of a Rack’s Macro Controls as a new variation. By
default, each stored variation will be named sequentially as “Variation 1”, “Variation 2”, etc.
Selected Macro Control variations can be renamed, duplicated, or deleted via commands in the Edit
menu or the context menu.
A Macro Control variation can be launched in its stored state via the Launch Macro Variation button
to the right, or overwritten via the “Overwrite Macro Variation” button to the left. Note that you can
exclude a Macro Control from changing when a different Macro Control variation is launched, by
using the Exclude Macro From Variations command in the context menu. Disabling the context menu
entry will re-enable changes to that control.
24.8 Mixing With Racks
Any Instrument or Drum Rack that contains more than one chain can be viewed and mixed alongside
the tracks in the Session View’s mixer. A track that contains these Racks will have a  button in its title
bar, which will fold the Rack’s mixer in or out. Likewise, any nested chains within the Rack will also
have this button. This makes it easy to get an overview of your Rack’s hierarchy — or hide it when you
just want to work on your mix.
458

--- PAGE 459 ---
Mixing Rack Chains in the Session View.
Chains in the Session View mixer look similar to tracks, but they have no clip slots. Their mixing and
routing controls mirror those found in the Rack’s chain list, so any changes made to these controls in
either area will be reflected in the other immediately. Likewise, many chain operations such as
reordering, renaming and regrouping can be performed from either the mixer or the chain list.
Clicking in a chain’s mixer title bar shows only that chain’s devices in the Device View.
As with tracks, when chains are multiselected in the Session View mixer, adjusting a mixer parameter
for one of the chains will adjust the same parameter in the other selected chains. Note that this
behavior only applies to parameters adjusted via the Session mixer and not when adjusting the same
parameters in the Rack’s chain list.
24.8. 1 Extracting Chains
All chains can be dragged from their parent Racks and placed into other tracks or Racks, either from
the chain list or from the Session View mixer. A Drum Rack’s return chains can also be extracted, and
will create new return tracks if dragged to the mixer. Drum chains have an additional feature: when
dragged from the mixer to a new track, they take their MIDI notes with them. For example, if you are
working on a MIDI drum loop within a single track and decide that you would like to move just the
snare onto its own track, simply select the snare chain’s title bar in the mixer and drag it to the mixer’s
drop area. This creates a new track with the full contents of the snare chain: both its devices and its
MIDI data. If you would like to extract only the devices, drag from the chain list instead of from the
mixer.
459

--- PAGE 460 ---
Extracting Drum Chains in the Mixer Extracts MIDI Data.
460

--- PAGE 461 ---
25. Automation and Editing Envelopes
Often, when working with Live’s mixer and devices, you will want the controls’ movements to become
part of the music. The movement of a control across the song timeline or Session clip is called 
automation; a control whose value changes in the course of this timeline is automated. Practically all
mixer and device controls in Live can be automated, including the song tempo.
25. 1 Recording Automation in Arrangement View
Automation can be recorded to the Arrangement View in two ways:
By manually changing parameters while recording new material directly into the Arrangement.
By recording a Session View performance into the Arrangement, if the Session clips contain
automation.
During Session-to-Arrangement recording, automation in Session clips is always recorded to the
Arrangement, as are any manual changes to parameters in tracks that are being recorded from the
Session.
When recording new material directly to the Arrangement, the Automation Arm button determines
whether or not manual parameter changes will be recorded.
The Automation Arm Button.
When Automation Arm is on, all changes of a control that occur while the Control Bar’s Arrangement
Record button is on become Arrangement automation. Try recording automation for a control; for
instance a mixer volume slider. After recording, play back what you have just recorded to see and
hear the effect of the control movement. You will notice that a little LED has appeared in the slider
thumb to indicate that the control is now automated. Try recording automation for track panning and
the Track Activator switch as well; their automation LEDs appear in their upper left corners.
1. 
2. 
46 1

--- PAGE 462 ---
Volume, Pan and the Track Activator Switch Have Been Automated.
25.2 Recording Automation in Session View
Automation can also be recorded to Session View clips. Here is how it works:
462

--- PAGE 463 ---
Controls for Recording Session Automation.
Enable the Automation Arm button to prepare for automation recording.
Activate the Arm button for the tracks onto which you want to record. Clip Record buttons will
appear in the empty slots of the armed tracks.
Click the Session Record button to begin recording automation.
It is also possible to record automation into all playing Session clips, regardless of whether or not they
are in armed tracks. This is done via the Session Automation Recording switch in the Record, Warp &
Launch Settings.
The Session Automation Recording Preference.
This allows you to, for example, overdub Session automation into an existing MIDI clip without also
recording notes into the clip.
1. 
2. 
3. 
463

--- PAGE 464 ---
Any automation in Session View becomes track-based automation when clips are recorded or copied
into Arrangement View.
25.2. 1 Session Automation Recording Modes
The automation recording behavior differs depending on how you adjust parameters while recording.
When using the mouse, recording stops immediately when you let go of the mouse button. This is
referred to in some editing applications as “touch” behavior. When adjusting parameters via knobs or
faders on MIDI controllers, recording will continue as long as you adjust the controller. When you let
go, recording will continue until the end of the clip’s loop and then will “punch out” automatically. This
is known as “latch” behavior in some applications.
25.3 Deleting Automation
To delete all automation data, right-click on an automated control to open its context menu and select
Delete Automation, or press the Ctrl Backspace (Win) / Cmd Delete (Mac) shortcut keys. The
automation LED disappears, and the control’s value stays constant across the entire Arrangement
timeline and in any Session View clips. You can also delete selected portions of automation by editing
breakpoint envelopes.
25.4 Overriding Automation
In practice, you will often want to try out new control moves without overwriting existing automation
data in the Arrangement. Well, nothing is forever in the world of infinite Undo, but it’s easy to disable
a control’s automation temporarily to avoid overwriting existing data: If you change an automated
control’s value while not recording, the automation LED goes off to indicate the control’s automation is
inactive. Any automation is therefore overridden by the current manual setting.
When one or more of the automated controls in your Live Set are not active, the Control Bar’s Re-
Enable Automation button lights up.
The Re-Enable Automation Button.
This button serves two purposes. It reminds you that the current state of the controls differs from the
state captured in Session clips or the Arrangement, and you can click on it to reactivate all automation
and thereby return to the automation state as it is written “on tape.“
464

--- PAGE 465 ---
You can also re-enable automation for only one parameter via the Re-Enable Automation option in
the context menu for that parameter. And in the Session View, you can re-enable overridden
automation by simply relaunching a clip that contains automation.
25.5 Drawing and Editing Automation
In the Arrangement View and in Session View clips, automation can be viewed and edited as
breakpoint envelopes.
Here is how automation editing works in the Arrangement:
Automation Envelopes in the Arrangement View.
To show automation envelopes, enable Automation Mode by clicking the  toggle button
above the track headers, or using the A  shortcut to the View menu item. Note that you can
disable Automation Mode by pressing the  toggle button or A  shortcut key again.
Clicking on a track’s mixer or device controls will display this control’s envelope on the clip
track.
Envelopes appear in the track’s main automation lane, “on top of“ the audio waveform or MIDI
display. This is useful for lining up breakpoints with the track’s audio or MIDI content. An
envelope’s vertical axis represents the control value and the horizontal axis represents time. For
switches and radio buttons, the value axis is “discrete”, meaning that it operates with non-
continuous values (e.g., on/off).
The Device chooser either selects the track mixer, one of the track’s devices, or “None“ to hide
the envelope. It also provides you with an overview of which devices actually have automation
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
465

--- PAGE 466 ---
by showing an LED next to their labels. You can make things clearer still by selecting “Show
Automated Parameters Only“ from the bottom of the chooser.
The Automation Control chooser selects a control from the device chosen in the Device chooser.
The labels of automated controls have an LED.
The  button moves the envelope into its own automation lane below the clip. You can then
select another automation parameter from the choosers to view it simultaneously. Holding Alt
(Win) / Cmd (Mac) while pressing the  button moves the selected envelope, as well as all
automated envelopes, into their own automation lane(s) below the clip. If the Device chooser is
set to “None“, this button will be hidden.
The  button hides its respective automation lane. Note that hiding a lane from view does not
deactivate its envelope. Holding Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac) while clicking the  button
removes the selected automation lane, as well as any subsequent automation lanes in that
track.
The  toggle appears when an envelope is moved into its own automation lane. This toggle
lets you show or hide all additional automation lanes.
Right-clicking on an automation lane header opens a context menu with additional options for
viewing envelopes. This context menu also contains commands to quickly clear all automation
envelopes for the track or any of its devices.
You can use the left arrow key to navigate from an automation lane to the main track, this will fold all
automation lanes as well. Using the left and right arrow keys on a main track will fold/unfold its
automation lanes.
Automation editing for Session View clips is covered in detail in the Clip Envelopes chapter.
25.5. 1 Drawing Envelopes
With Draw Mode enabled, you can click and drag to “draw“ an envelope curve.
The Draw Mode Switch.
To toggle Draw Mode, select the Draw Mode option from the Options menu, click on the Control
Bar’s Draw Mode switch, or press B . Holding B  while editing with the mouse temporarily toggles
Draw Mode.
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
466

--- PAGE 467 ---
Drawing an Envelope.
Drawing creates steps as wide as the visible grid, which you can modify using a number of handy
shortcuts. Holding down the Shift modifier while dragging vertically allows you to adjust the
automation value of a step at a finer resolution.
For freehand drawing, you can hide the grid using the Snap to Grid Options menu entry or the Ctrl
4  (Win) / Cmd 4  (Mac) shortcut. To temporarily enable freehand drawing while the grid is
shown, hold down Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac) while drawing.
25.5.2 Editing Breakpoints
With Draw Mode off, the envelope display looks and works differently. The line segments and the
breakpoints connecting them become draggable objects. Clicking and dragging in the envelope’s
background defines a selection. Here’s how editing breakpoints works:
Click at a position on a line segment to create a new breakpoint there.
Double-click anywhere in the envelope display that is not on a line segment, to create a new
breakpoint there.
Click on a breakpoint to delete it.
To help you edit breakpoints more quickly, automation values are shown when you create,
hover over, or drag a breakpoint. Note that when hovering over or dragging a selected line
segment, the automation value shown will correspond to the breakpoint closest to the cursor.
• 
• 
• 
• 
467

--- PAGE 468 ---
A Breakpoint’s Automation Value.
Click and drag a breakpoint to move it to the desired location. If the breakpoint you are
dragging is in the current selection, all other breakpoints in the selection will follow the
movement. When dragging a breakpoint, a thin black vertical line will appear to help you see
where your breakpoint is positioned in relation to the grid lines.
Right-click on a breakpoint and choose Edit Value from the context menu. This allows you to set
an exact value in the editable field using your computer keyboard. If multiple breakpoints are
selected, they will all be moved relatively. Similarly, you can also create new breakpoints at an
exact value by right-clicking on a preview breakpoint and choosing the Add Value command.
Click near (but not on) a line segment or hold Shift and click directly on a line segment to
select it. With the left mouse button held down, drag to move the line segment to the desired
location. If the line segment you are dragging is in the current time selection, Live will insert
breakpoints at the selection’s edges and the entire segment will move together.
To Move all Breakpoints Within the Selection, Drag Any One of Them.
Breakpoints created close to a grid line will automatically snap to that line. Hold down the 
Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac) modifier while dragging horizontally to bypass grid snapping.
Breakpoints and line segments will snap to time positions where neighboring breakpoints exist.
You can remove a neighboring breakpoint by continuing to drag a breakpoint or line segment
“over” it horizontally.
When moving a line segment or breakpoint, hold Shift while dragging to restrict movement
to either the horizontal or vertical axis.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
468

--- PAGE 469 ---
Holding down the Shift modifier while dragging vertically allows you to adjust the
breakpoint or line segment value at a finer resolution.
Hold Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) and drag a line segment to curve the segment. Double-
click while holding Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) to return the segment to a straight line.
A Curved Envelope Segment.
25.5.3 Stretching and Skewing Envelopes
The Handles Allow You to Stretch or Skew Envelopes.
When hovering over a time selection, handles appear around the outer edges of the selection.
Clicking and dragging these handles allows you to transform the selected automation in the following
ways:
Dragging the top and bottom center handles lets you stretch the automation along the vertical
axis. While dragging, a rectangle indicates the amount of stretching. The rectangle will snap to
upper and lower boundaries and when its corners intersect. Holding Shift allows you to
finely adjust the amount of stretching. Dragging beyond the boundaries will clip the envelope.
• 
• 
• 
469

--- PAGE 470 ---
While Dragging a Handle, A Rectangle Indicates the Amount of Stretching or Skewing.
Dragging the left and right center handles lets you stretch the automation along the horizontal
axis. Dragging over existing breakpoints outside the time selection will remove them. If you hold
Shift while stretching, these breakpoints will be moved in proportion to the movement of the
handle. Hold down the Alt (Win) / Cmd (Mac) modifier while dragging horizontally to
bypass grid snapping.
Dragging any of the corner handles lets you skew the automation. While dragging, a rectangle
indicates the degree of skewing. The rectangle will snap to upper and lower boundaries and
when its corners intersect. Holding Shift allows you to finely adjust the amount of skewing.
Dragging a handle while holding Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) will mirror the movement in
the opposite handle, as if you were dragging them both simultaneously in opposite directions.
25.5.4 Simplifying Envelopes
If your automation envelope has a lot of breakpoints, e.g., after recording automation, the Simplify
Envelope command can be quite useful. Simplify Envelope calculates the optimal number of
breakpoints needed to represent the selected automation envelope, and removes any unnecessary
breakpoints, replacing them with straight lines or curved segments where appropriate.
The Simplify Envelope Command Removes Unnecessary Breakpoints.
Make a time selection on the automation you wish to simplify, and choose Simplify Envelope from the
context menu.
• 
• 
• 
470

--- PAGE 492 ---
28. Live Audio Effect Reference
Live comes with a selection of custom-designed, built-in audio effects. These effects range from
essential utilities like EQs, compressors, and filters to creative shaping tools such as delays, reverbs,
and saturators, among others.
To learn the basics of using effects in Live, check out the Working with Instruments and Effects chapter.
Note that different editions of Live have different feature sets, so some audio effects covered in this
reference may not be available in all editions.
28. 1 Amp
The Amp Effect.
Amp is an effect that emulates the sound and character of seven classic guitar amplifiers. Developed
in collaboration with Softube, Amp uses physical modelling technology to provide a range of
authentic and usable amplifier tones, with a simple and consistent set of controls.
492

--- PAGE 493 ---
There are seven amp models to choose from:
Clean is based on the ”Brilliant” channel of a classic amp from the ’60s. This amp was widely
used by guitarists of the British Invasion.
Boost is based on the ”Tremolo” channel of the same amp, and is great for edgy rock riffs.
Blues is based on a ’70s-era guitar amp with a bright character. This classic amp is popular
with country, rock and blues guitarists.
Rock is modeled after a classic 45 watt amp from the ’60s. This is perhaps the best known rock
amp of all time.
Lead is based on the ”Modern” channel of a high-gain amp popular with metal guitarists.
Heavy is based on the ”Vintage” channel of the same amp and is also ideal for metal and
grunge sounds.
Bass is modeled after a rare PA from the ’70s which has become popular with bass players due
to its strong low end and ”fuzz” at high volumes.
Although the real-world versions of these amplifiers all have unique parameters, Live’s Amp effect uses
the same set of controls for each model. This makes it very easy to quickly change the overall
character of your sound without having to make numerous adjustments.
Gain adjusts the level of input to the preamplifier, while Volume adjusts the output stage of the power
amplifier. Although Gain and Volume work together to determine Amp’s overall level, Gain is the
primary control for the distortion amount. Higher Gain settings result in a more distorted sound. When
using the Blues, Heavy and Bass models, high Volume levels can also add considerable distortion.
The Bass, Middle and Treble knobs are EQ controls that adjust the timbre of the sound. As on a real-
world amplifier, Amp’s EQ parameters interact with each other — and with the rest of Amp’s
parameters — in non-linear and sometimes unpredictable ways. For example, increasing EQ levels
can, in some cases, also increase the amount of distortion.
Presence is an additional tone control for mid/high frequencies in the power amp stage. Its influence
on the sound varies considerably depending on the amp model used but can add (or subtract)
”edge” or ”crispness.”
The Output switch toggles between mono and stereo (Dual) processing. Note that in Dual mode, Amp
uses twice as much CPU.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals.
28. 1. 1 Amp Tips
Because Amp is modeled on real-world analog devices, its behavior can sometimes be difficult to
predict. Here are some tips on getting the most out of Amp:
28. 1. 1. 1 Amps and Cabinets
Guitar amps are designed to be used with accompanying speaker cabinets. For this reason, Amp
comes with a companion effect called Cabinet which is designed to be used after Amp in a device
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
493

--- PAGE 494 ---
chain. If you’re looking for authenticity, we recommend this signal flow. But you can also achieve
interesting and exotic sounds by using Amp and Cabinet independently.
28. 1. 1.2 Electricity
The various circuits in guitar amps work with a continuous and fixed amount of electricity. For this
reason, turning up a particular parameter may inadvertently decrease the amount of available energy
somewhere else in the amp. This is particularly noticeable in the EQ controls. For example, turning up
Treble can reduce the level of bass and midrange frequencies. You may find that you need to carefully
adjust a number of seemingly unrelated parameters to get the results you want.
28. 1. 1.3 More than guitars
While Amp and Cabinet sound great with guitars, you can get very interesting results by feeding them
with drums, synthesizers or other sound sources. For example, try using Amp with Operator or Analog
to add analog grit to your digital sounds.
28.2 Auto Filter
The Auto Filter Effect.
The Auto Filter effect provides classic analog filter emulation. It can be modulated by an envelope
follower and/or an LFO to create moving filter effects. The envelope follower can track either the
filtered signal or an external sidechain source.
Auto Filter offers a variety of filter types including low-pass, high-pass, band-pass, notch, and a
special Morph filter. Each filter can be switched between 1 2 and 24 dB slopes as well as a selection
of analog-modeled circuit behaviors developed in conjunction with Cytomic that emulate hardware
filters found on some classic analog synthesizers.
494

--- PAGE 495 ---
The Clean circuit option is a high-quality, CPU-efficient design that is the same as the filters used in EQ
Eight. This is available for all of the filter types.
The OSR circuit option is a state-variable type with resonance limited by a unique hard-clipping
diode. This is modeled on the filters used in a somewhat rare British monosynth, and is available for all
filter types.
The MS2 circuit option uses a Sallen-Key design and soft clipping to limit resonance. It is modeled on
the filters used in a famous semi-modular Japanese monosynth and is available for the low-pass and
high-pass filters.
The SMP circuit is a custom design not based on any particular hardware. It shares characteristics of
both the MS2 and PRD circuits and is available for the low-pass and high-pass filters.
The PRD circuit uses a ladder design and has no explicit resonance limiting. It is modeled on the filters
used in a legacy dual-oscillator monosynth from the United States and is available for the low-pass
and high-pass filters.
The most important filter parameters are the typical synth controls Frequency and Resonance.
Frequency determines where in the harmonic spectrum the filter is applied; Resonance boosts
frequencies near that point.
When using the low-pass, high-pass, or band-pass filter with any circuit type besides Clean, there is
an additional Drive control that can be used to add gain or distortion to the signal before it enters the
filter.
The Morph filter has an additional Morph control which sweeps the filter type continuously from low-
pass to band-pass to high-pass to notch and back to low-pass.
You can quickly snap the Morph control to a low-pass, band-pass, high-pass, or notch setting via
dedicated options in the context menu of the Morph knob.
You can adjust Frequency and Resonance by clicking and dragging in the X-Y controller or via the
knobs. You can also click on the Freq and Res numeric displays and type in exact values.
When using the non-Clean circuit types, the Resonance control allows for self-oscillation. At
Resonance values above 100%, the filter will continue to ring indefinitely even after the input signal
has been stopped. The pitch of the self-oscillation depends on both the Frequency and Resonance
values.
The Envelope section controls how the envelope modulation affects the filter frequency. The Amount
control defines the extent to which the envelope affects the filter frequency, while the Attack control
sets how the envelope responds to rising input signals. Low Attack values cause a fast response to
input levels; high values integrate any changes gradually, creating a looser, slower response. Think of
it as adding inertia to the response.
Lower Release values cause the envelope to respond more quickly to falling input signals. Higher
values extend the envelope’s decay.
495

--- PAGE 496 ---
Normally, the signal being filtered and the input source that triggers the envelope follower are the
same signal. But by using sidechaining, it is possible to filter a signal based on the envelope of
another signal. To access the Sidechain parameters, unfold the Auto Filter window by toggling the 
button in its title bar.
Auto Filter’s Sidechain Parameters.
Enabling this section with the Sidechain button allows you to select another track from the choosers
below. This causes the selected track’s signal to trigger the filter’s envelope follower, instead of the
signal that is actually being filtered.
The Gain knob adjusts the level of the external sidechain’s input, while the Dry/Wet knob allows you
to use a combination of sidechain and original signal as the envelope follower’s trigger. With Dry/
Wet at 100%, the envelope follower tracks the sidechain source exclusively. At 0%, the sidechain is
effectively bypassed. Note that increasing the gain does not increase the volume of the source signal
in the mix. The sidechain audio is only a trigger for the envelope follower and is never actually heard.
The Auto Filter also contains a Low Frequency Oscillator to modulate filter frequency in a periodic
fashion. The respective Amount control sets how much the LFO affects the filter. This can be used in
conjunction with or instead of the envelope follower.
The Rate control specifies the LFO speed. It can be set in terms of hertz, or synced to the song tempo,
allowing for controlled rhythmic filtering.
Available LFO waveform shapes are sine (creates smooth modulations with rounded peaks and
valleys), square, triangle, sawtooth up, sawtooth down, and sample and hold (generates random
positive and negative modulation values) in mono and stereo.
There are two LFOs, one for each stereo channel. The Phase and Offset controls define the relationship
between these two LFOs.
Phase keeps both LFOs at the same frequency, but can set the two LFO waveforms ”out of phase” with
each other, creating stereo movement. Set to ”1 80”, the LFO outputs are 1 80 degrees apart, so that
when one LFO reaches its peak, the other is at its minimum.
Spin detunes the two LFO speeds relative to each other. Each stereo channel is modulated at a
different frequency, as determined by the Spin amount.
496

--- PAGE 497 ---
For sample and hold (“S&H”), the Phase and Spin controls are not relevant and do not affect the
sound. Instead, the Auto Filter offers two kinds of sample and hold: The upper sample and hold type
available in the chooser provides independent random modulation generators for the left and right
channels (stereo), while the lower one modulates both channels with the same signal (mono).
The Quantize Beat control applies quantized modulation to the filter frequency. With Quantize Beat
off, frequency modulation follows the control source, e.g., the Envelope, LFO, or manually-adjusted
cutoff. Turning this feature on updates the filter modulation rhythmically with stepped changes that
track the tempo. The numbered buttons represent 16th notes, so, for example, selecting “4” as a beat
value produces a modulation change once per quarter note.
28.3 Auto Pan-Tremolo
The Auto Pan-Tremolo Effect.
Auto Pan-Tremolo uses LFO modulation to affect the input signal’s stereo position or amplitude to
create automatic panning, tremolo, and gating effects.
There are two modes available: Panning and Tremolo. In Panning mode, two LFOs modulate the
placement of the input signal within the stereo panorama by alternating its amplitude between the left
and right channels. In Tremolo mode, a single LFO modulates the signal’s amplitude to create
variation in volume. Use the respective toggles to switch between modes. The LFO waveform and
controls in the display update depending on which mode is selected to reflect its corresponding
properties.
497

--- PAGE 498 ---
The Effect Can Be Used in Panning Mode or Tremolo Mode.
The real-time visualization below the LFO waveform shows the current stereo position in Panning
mode or the current amplitude level in Tremolo mode. This makes it easy to see at a glance how the
input signal is moving across the left and right channels or how its amplitude is fluctuating.
Use the Waveform drop-down to select an LFO shape: Sine, Triangle, Shark Tooth, Saw Up, Saw
Down, Square, Random, Wander, and S&H (Sample and Hold).
Select one of the available Time modes to determine the rate of the LFO: Rate, Time, Synced, Dotted,
Triplet, or 16th. Once selected, the corresponding modulation rate control below the drop-down
updates to reflect the value associated with that mode. For example, in Time mode, you can set the
period of the LFO anywhere from 100 milliseconds to 200 seconds, which is useful for creating long
modulation cycles.
You can choose between two Stereo Offset modes: Phase and Spin. In Phase mode, the LFO
waveforms for the left and right channels can be offset by a set number of degrees. At 1 80°, the LFOs
are perfectly out of phase so that when one LFO reaches its peak value, the other is at its minimum. In
Spin mode, the left and right channels diverge progressively based on the set percentage. This adds a
subtle asymmetry between the two channels. Note that only Phase mode is available when using the
Random, Wander, and S&H waveforms.
When using any of the beat-division-based Time modes (Synced, Triplet, Dotted, or 16th), the Phase
Offset control becomes available and can be used to shift the starting point of each LFO channel
within its cycle relative to the beat grid. This is useful for offsetting the modulation so that it begins
slightly before or after the beat.
When using the Random, Wander, or S&H waveforms, Phase Offset functions as a stereo width
control and can be used to introduce variation between the channels.
Use the Invert toggle to flip the polarity of the LFO. When enabled, the positive and negative values of
the waveform are swapped, which effectively turns the waveform upside down. In Panning mode, for
example, inverting the Saw Up waveform creates a Saw Down waveform. In Tremolo mode, the
peaks of the waveform become the valleys and vice versa. When using ramp-shaped waveforms,
enabling Invert produces a ducking effect, while disabling it creates a gating effect.
Tremolo mode includes two additional options that can be enabled to influence the behavior of the
LFO modulation: Harmonic and Vintage.
498

--- PAGE 499 ---
The Harmonic and Vintage Tremolo Mode Toggles.
With Harmonic enabled, the high and low frequencies are modulated in an alternating pattern rather
than in parallel. A fixed crossover of 600 Hz splits the signal into two frequency bands.
With Vintage enabled, the signal’s amplitude is modulated by the LFO as well as shaped by a non-
linear curve, which adds warmth and grit to the tremolo effect.
Below the display are controls for adjusting the LFO’s amount, rate, shape, attack, and response to the
input signal’s level.
499

--- PAGE 500 ---
Use the Controls Below the Display to Adjust the LFO Modulation.
Use the Amount control to set how much LFO modulation is applied to the incoming signal.
The LFO rate can be set using the control to the right of the Amount control. The name and unit of this
control change depending on the selected Time mode. For example, the control appears as Freq
when Rate is selected and the value is set in hertz (Hz). In Time mode, the control appears as Time
and the value is set in milliseconds (ms). In the Synced, Triplet, Dotted, and 16th modes, the control
appears as Rate and the value is set in beat divisions.
Note that the values for the Amount control and the LFO rate are shared between the Panning and
Tremolo modes and cannot be set independently.
The Shape control affects the LFO waveform differently in each mode. In Panning mode, positive
Shape values push each waveform toward its upper and lower limits. This shortens the overlap
between the LFOs so that the transition from one channel to the next happens more abruptly. In
Tremolo mode, positive values gradually expand the waveform to create rounded peaks, while
negative values gradually compress the peaks into an angular shape. At its maximum and minimum
values, the Shape control can create ramps for gating effects (with Invert off) and pumping effects
(with Invert on).
500

--- PAGE 501 ---
Use the Shape Control to Create Ramps for Gating and Ducking Effects.
The Attack Time slider sets how long it takes, in milliseconds, to reach the maximum amount of
modulation after a transient is detected. A long attack time can be useful for applying the effect only
during the sustained portion of the signal while leaving the initial peaks unaffected. In Panning mode,
this keeps transients centered in the stereo field, while in Tremolo mode, this helps preserve their
impact.
The Dynamic Frequency Modulation slider determines how much the input signal’s level affects the
LFO rate. At positive values, louder signals increase the LFO rate, while negative values decrease it.
28.4 Auto Shift
The Auto Shift Effect.
Auto Shift is a real-time pitch tracking and correction device with controls for vibrato, pitch shifting,
and formant shifting. Its design makes it especially well-suited for transforming vocals, though it can
be used with any monophonic audio signal. You can pitch correct audio using a defined scale or
using the MIDI notes from a separate track. Auto Shift also includes a built-in LFO, so you can
modulate incoming audio over time.
501

--- PAGE 502 ---
28.4. 1 Input Section
Auto Shift’s Input Section.
Auto Shift can receive audio as well as MIDI input. The Input section lets you configure how incoming
signals are processed in the device.
The Input Pitch display shows the pitch of the incoming audio in notes and cents.
You can set the frequency range for the audio input using one of the three Pitch Range toggles. This
helps optimize the quality of the pitch estimation and correction. Use High for signals in a high
frequency range, Mid for signals in a mid frequency range, and Bass for signals in a low frequency
range. Each toggle has an LED that flashes when the incoming audio falls within its corresponding
range.
The Pitch Range LED Flashes to Indicate the Range for the Incoming Signal.
Note that each pitch range setting affects the device’s latency differently, so switching between
toggles changes the overall latency.
You can use the Input Gain slider to adjust the gain of the incoming signal from -24 to +24 dB.
The Latency Readout displays the device’s latency in milliseconds. Enabling Live Mode via the toggle
in the device’s title bar can help reduce latency, which is particularly useful for live performances.
However, slight glitches may occur during note onsets or rapid pitch changes in this mode.
502

--- PAGE 503 ---
Enable Live Mode to Reduce Latency.
28.4. 1. 1 MIDI Input
Auto Shift’s MIDI Input Panel.
Enabling MIDI input lets you use the notes from a separate MIDI track to pitch correct the incoming
audio instead of tuning it to a defined scale via the Quantizer.
The MIDI In toggle shows or hides the MIDI Input panel, which contains track routing and voice mode
settings.
Use the MIDI On toggle to activate or deactivate MIDI input. When enabled, the Quantizer tab is
replaced with the MIDI tab, where you can further shape the behavior of incoming MIDI notes.
The External Source chooser sets the MIDI sidechain source, i.e., the track used to send notes to Auto
Shift. The Tapping Point chooser lets you specify whether the MIDI sidechain is sent before or after any
MIDI effects that are in the source track’s device chain. Select Pre FX to bypass the effects on the track,
or select Post FX or Post Mixer to include them.
There are two voice mode toggles to choose from: Mono and Poly. Mono uses a single voice,
meaning that only one note can be used for the pitch correction at a time. You can use the Glide slider
to set the time that overlapping notes take to slide their pitch to the next incoming pitch. Poly can use
up to eight voices at once, making it ideal for harmonization. Use the Voice Count chooser to set the
maximum number of voices to 2, 4, or 8.
503

--- PAGE 504 ---
Note that when using MIDI input, Auto Shift will only produce sound when MIDI notes are received.
28.4.2 Quantizer Tab
Auto Shift’s Quantizer Tab.
The Quantizer corrects incoming audio according to the notes of a defined scale. In the Quantizer
tab, you can access controls for monitoring how the signal is processed, as well as controls for
adjusting the correction.
The Pitch Correction Meter displays how much the incoming signal is being shifted in cents to match
the target note, which is shown beneath the meter. The target note is determined by the set scale.
You can adjust the intensity of the pitch correction using the Correction Strength slider. The higher the
value, the more the audio is shifted to match the target note. Use the Smooth toggle to switch
smoothing on or off. When enabled, pitch transitions between notes are smoothed, and more natural
vibrato is retained. You can set the smoothing time from 0 to 200 milliseconds using the Smoothing
Time slider. The Correction Strength and Smoothing parameters determine the overall style of the pitch
correction. With these settings, you can produce results ranging from subtle and nuanced to rigid and
quantized.
The Included Notes in Scale display determines which notes are used for the pitch correction. You can
create a custom scale by selecting notes in the display, or you can set the key and scale using the
Root and Scale choosers. The Pitch Shift slider can be used to transpose the pitch up or down in scale
degrees; the pitch shift is applied after the correction.
Auto Shift supports scale awareness: when the Use Current Scale toggle in the device title bar is
enabled, the Quantizer follows the clip’s current scale. Additionally, the Included Keys in Scale
display highlights the selected scale’s notes in purple, and the Root and Scale choosers are
deactivated.
504

--- PAGE 505 ---
28.4.3 MIDI Tab
Auto Shift’s MIDI Tab.
When MIDI input is activated, the Quantizer tab is replaced with the MIDI tab, where you can
customize the behavior of incoming MIDI.
The piano visualization displays notes as they are received from the source track. These notes are then
used to correct the incoming audio.
Using MIDI Notes to Pitch Correct Audio.
Note that scale awareness is not available when using MIDI input. To use the notes within a specific
scale, you can add the Scale MIDI effect to the source track. Make sure Auto Shift’s Tapping Point
chooser is set to Post FX or Post Mixer so that the effect is included.
The Attack Time slider sets the attack time of the note’s envelope from 0 to 1,000 milliseconds. The
Release Time slider sets the release time of the note’s envelope from 0 to 5 seconds.
When the Note Latch toggle is switched on, MIDI notes are held until the next Note On message. The
Pitch Bend Range control sets the device’s pitch bend range, from 0 to 48 semitones.
In the Mod Routing section, four parameters can be modulated using MIDI or MPE data: Pitch,
Formant, Volume, and Pan. Each parameter can be modulated by one of six modulation sources:
Velocity, Pressure, Mod Wheel, Pitch Bend, Note PB, or Slide. Use each target’s dedicated Mod
Source drop-down menu to select a modulation source, and adjust the modulation depth with its
corresponding Mod Depth slider.
505

--- PAGE 506 ---
28.4.4 LFO Tab
Auto Shift’s LFO Tab.
You can use the built-in LFO to apply modulation to the incoming audio’s pitch, formants, volume, and
panning.
The LFO Reset toggle switches LFO re-triggering on or off. When enabled, the LFO’s phase will be re-
triggered at note onsets. When using the Quantizer, an onset occurs when a pitch is detected after a
period of unpitched audio. The Onset Indicator LED flashes when the LFO’s phase is re-triggered.
With MIDI input, an onset occurs at the start of a new note, and the Onset Indicator becomes the
Trigger Indicator.
The LFO Delay slider sets the delay time before the attack phase begins, from 0 to 1.5 seconds. The
LFO Attack slider sets the attack time during which the LFO’s level increases to its peak level, from 0 to
2 seconds. As you modify either value, the waveform in the display will reflect the changes.
You can select from nine modulation waveforms using the LFO Waveform drop-down menu: Sine,
Triangle, Triangle 8, Triangle 16, Saw Up, Saw Down, Rectangle, Random, and Random S&H.
The LFO Rate slider lets you select the speed of the LFO in milliseconds or tempo-synced beat
divisions, as determined by the LFO Sync toggles.
In the Mod Routing section, you can modulate four parameters using the LFO: Pitch, Formant, Volume,
and Pan. The individual Mod Depth sliders set the amount of modulation that is applied to each
parameter.
Note that the LFO modulation affects the incoming signal regardless of whether it is being pitch-
corrected.
506

--- PAGE 507 ---
28.4.5 Pitch Section
Auto Shift’s Pitch Section.
You can apply both pitch and formant shifting to incoming signals using the controls in the Pitch
section.
The Pitch Shift control sets the amount of transposition applied in semitones. You can use the Pitch Shift
Fine slider to set the transposition in cents.
Use the Formant Shift control to shift the formants — the resonant frequencies that help define the tonal
characteristics of a sound — within a range of -100% to 100%. At higher values, pitches will sound
higher and more resonant, while at lower values pitches will sound lower and less full. Shifting
formants lets you create a higher or lower sound without actually transposing the pitch.
The Formant Follow slider determines how much of the formant shifting follows the pitch shifting; higher
values result in a more natural-sounding transposition.
Note that you can use the Pitch Shift and Formant Shift controls with or without pitch correcting the
signal.
507

--- PAGE 508 ---
28.4.6 Vibrato Section
Auto Shift’s Vibrato Section.
The Vibrato section contains controls for applying vibrato to incoming audio and adjusting the overall
balance of the dry and processed signal.
There are three main vibrato controls:
Vibrato Amount — adjusts the depth of the vibrato, from 0 to 200 cents.
Vibrato Rate — adjusts the speed of the vibrato, from 2 to 1 5 Hz.
Vibrato Fade In — adjusts the vibrato’s fade-in time in milliseconds.
Enabling the Natural Vibrato toggle creates variations in the vibrato’s speed and depth, producing a
more realistic effect.
Note that you can use the vibrato controls with or without pitch correcting the signal.
The Dry/Wet slider sets the balance between the dry and processed signals. At 0%, no pitch
correction is applied, while at 100%, only the pitch corrected signal is heard. You can create a
doubler effect by setting this value to 50%, which equally balances the original and corrected signals.
• 
• 
• 
508

--- PAGE 509 ---
28.5 Beat Repeat
The Beat Repeat Effect.
Beat Repeat allows for the creation of controlled or randomized repetitions of an incoming signal.
The Interval control defines how often Beat Repeat captures new material and begins repeating it.
Interval is synced to and set in terms of the song tempo, with values ranging from ”1/32” to ”4 Bars.”
The Offset control shifts the point defined by Interval forward in time. If Interval is set to ”1 Bar,” for
example, and Offset to ”8/16”, material will be captured for repetition once per bar on the third beat
(i.e., halfway, or eight-sixteenths of the way, through the bar).
You can add randomness to the process using the Chance control, which defines the likelihood of
repetitions actually taking place when Interval and Offset ”ask” for them. If Chance is set to 100
percent, repetitions will always take place at the given Interval/Offset time; if set to zero, there will be
no repetitions.
Gate defines the total length of all repetitions in sixteenth notes. If Gate is set to ”4/16”, the
repetitions will occur over the period of one beat, starting at the position defined by Interval and
Offset.
Activating the Repeat button bypasses all of the above controls, immediately capturing material and
repeating it until deactivated.
The Grid control defines the grid size — the size of each repeated slice. If set to ”1/16”, a slice the
size of one sixteenth note will be captured and repeated for the given Gate length (or until Repeat is
deactivated). Large grid values create rhythmic loops, while small values create sonic artifacts. The
No Triplets button sets grid division as binary.
509

--- PAGE 510 ---
Grid size can be changed randomly using the Variation control. If Variation is set to ”0”, grid size is
fixed. But when Variation is set to higher values, the grid fluctuates considerably around the set Grid
value. Variation has several different modes, available in the chooser below: Trigger creates
variations of the grid when repetitions are triggered; 1/4, 1/8 and 1/16 trigger variations in regular
intervals; and Auto forces Beat Repeat to apply a new random variation after each repetition — the
most complex form of grid variation in Beat Repeat (especially if triplets are also allowed).
Beat Repeat’s repetitions can be pitched down for special sonic effects. Pitch is adjusted through
resampling in Beat Repeat, lengthening segments to pitch them down without again compressing them
to adjust for the length change. This means that the rhythmical structure can become quite ambiguous
with higher Pitch values. The Pitch Decay control tapers the pitch curve, making each repeated slice
play lower than the previous one. Warning: This is the most obscure parameter of Beat Repeat.
Beat Repeat includes a combined low-pass and high-pass filter for defining the passed frequency
range of the device. You can turn the filter on and off, and set the center frequency and width of the
passed frequency band, using the respective controls.
The original signal (which was received at Beat Repeat’s input) is mixed with Beat Repeat’s repetitions
according to one of three mix modes: Mix allows the original signal to pass through the device and
have repetitions added to it; Insert mutes the original signal when repetitions are playing but passes it
otherwise; and Gate passes only the repetitions, never passing the original signal. Gate mode is
especially useful when the effect is housed in a return track.
You can set the output level of the device using the Volume control, and apply Decay to create
gradually fading repetitions.
5 10

--- PAGE 511 ---
28.6 Cabinet
The Cabinet Effect.
Cabinet is an effect that emulates the sound of five classic guitar cabinets. Developed in collaboration
with Softube, Cabinet uses physical modelling technology to provide a range of authentic sounds,
with optimized mics and mic positioning.
The Speaker chooser allows you to select from a variety of speaker sizes and combinations. The
chooser’s entries indicate the number of speakers and the speaker size in inches. For example, ”4x1 2”
means four 1 2-inch speakers. In the real world, more and larger speakers generally means higher
volumes.
The Microphone chooser changes the position of the virtual microphone in relation to the speaker
cabinet. Near On-Axis micing results in a bright, focused sound, while Near Off-Axis is more resonant
and a bit less bright. Choose the Far position for a balanced sound that also has some characteristics
of the virtual ”room.”
5 1 1

--- PAGE 512 ---
Cabinet Mic Positions.
The switch below the Microphone chooser toggles between a Dynamic and Condenser mic. Dynamic
mics are a bit grittier and commonly used when close-micing guitar cabinets because they are
capable of handling much higher volumes. Condenser mics are more accurate, and are commonly
used for micing from a distance. Of course, Cabinet’s virtual condenser mic won’t be damaged by
high volume levels, so feel free to experiment.
The Output switch toggles between mono and stereo (Dual) processing. Note that in Dual mode,
Cabinet uses twice as much CPU.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals.
28.6. 1 Cabinet Tips
Here are some tips for using Cabinet:
28.6. 1. 1 Amps and Cabinets
Guitar cabinets are normally fed by guitar amps. For this reason, Cabinet is paired with Amp, and the
two are normally used together. But you can also achieve interesting and exotic sounds by using Amp
and Cabinet separately.
5 1 2

--- PAGE 513 ---
28.6. 1.2 Multiple mics
A common studio technique is to use multiple mics on a single cabinet, and then adjust the balance
during mixing. This is easy to do by using Live’s Audio Effect Racks. Try this:
Configure one instance of Cabinet as you like.
Put the Cabinet into an Audio Effect Rack.
Duplicate the Rack chain that contains the original Cabinet as many times as you like.
In the additional chains, choose a different Microphone setting and/or mic type.
Adjust the relative volumes of the Rack’s chains in the Rack’s mixer.
28.7 Channel EQ
The Channel EQ Effect.
Inspired by EQs found on classic mixing desks, Channel EQ is a simple, yet flexible three-band EQ,
fine-tuned to provide musical results for a variety of audio material.
Activating the HP 80 Hz switch will toggle a high-pass filter, which is useful for removing the rumble
from a signal.
The Low parameter controls the gain of a low shelf filter, tuned to 100 Hz. This filter can boost or
attenuate low frequencies by a range of +/- 1 5 dB. The filter curve is adaptive and will change
dynamically relative to the amount of gain applied.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
5 1 3

--- PAGE 514 ---
The Mid parameter controls the gain of a sweepable peak filter. Unlike the Low and High parameters,
Mid has a range of +/- 1 2 dB. The frequency slider located above the Mid control allows you to set
the center frequency of this filter from 1 20 Hz to 7.5 kHz.
When boosting, the High parameter controls the gain of a high shelf filter, up to 1 5 dB. When
attenuating, the shelving filter is combined with a low-pass filter. Turning the parameter from 0 dB
towards -1 5 dB will simultaneously reduce the cutoff frequency of the low-pass filter from 20 kHz to 8
kHz.
A spectrum visualization provides real-time visual feedback of the resulting filter curves and processed
signal.
The Output control sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal, and can be used to
compensate for any changed signal amplitude resulting from the EQ settings.
28.7 . 1 Channel EQ Tips
You can use Channel EQ to further shape the output of a reverb effect in a device chain.
You can also shape the sound of a single drum or an entire drum kit, by placing an instance of
Channel EQ onto one or multiple Drum Rack pads.
Adding an instance of Saturator after Channel EQ in a device chain allows you to simulate the
analog nonlinearities of a mixer channel strip. In such cases, boosting the low end considerably
would also lead to increased distortion, similar to the behavior of analog mixing desks.
5 1 4

--- PAGE 515 ---
28.8 Chorus-Ensemble
The Chorus-Ensemble Effect.
Chorus-Ensemble offers a classic two-delay line chorus with an optional third delay line mode. With a
wide variety of tools for thickening sounds, creating flanging and vibrato effects, this device also
allows you to easily recreate string ensemble chorus sounds.
Three different modes are provided, which can be chosen in the display: Classic, Ensemble, and
Vibrato.
Classic mode creates a thickened sound by adding two time-modulated delayed signals to the input.
Use it for a classic chorus sound, adding light motion to your audio signal.
Ensemble mode is inspired by a thick three-delay line chorus pedal used in the ‘70s. Ensemble mode
is based on and shares controls with Classic mode, but creates richer, smoother, and more intense
chorus sound by using three delayed signals with evenly split modulation phase offsets.
Vibrato mode applies stronger modulation than a chorus to create pitch variation. The shape of the
modulation waveform can morph seamlessly from a sine to a triangle, and be used to create well-
known “police siren” sounds.
In addition to the mode selector buttons, the display also provides access to a high-pass filter and the
Width parameter. Width is active in Classic and Ensemble modes, but while in Vibrato mode, this
parameter is replaced by Offset and Shape controls.
When enabled, the high-pass filter reduces the chorus effect on signal components below the
frequency set by the High-Pass Frequency slider, ranging from 20 Hz to 2000 Hz.
5 1 5

--- PAGE 516 ---
Width sets the stereo width of the wet signal, which in turn adjusts the chorus level balance between
the mid and side channels. At 0% the signal will be mono, at 100% the balance is equal, and at
200% the chorus level is twice as loud in the sides as in the middle. This is used for maintaining the
level of the effect across the stereo field, which can be helpful during mixing.
When using Vibrato mode, Offset adjusts the amount of phase offset between the waveforms for the
left and right channel. At 1 80°, the channels will be perfectly out of phase. Shape enables you to
change the shape of the modulation waveform between a sine and a triangle.
Global parameters available include Rate, Amount, Feedback, Output, Warmth and Dry/Wet.
Rate sets the modulation rate in Hertz, and can be adjusted either with the dial or by dragging up or
down in the display. Turn up Rate for a more drastic chorus sound, or keep it low for more gentle
phasing.
Amount adjusts the amplitude of the modulation signals that affects delay times. Higher values result in
a stronger time deviation from the unmodulated time setting.
Feedback sets the amount of each channel’s output that is fed back to its input. Increasing this sounds
more extreme and tends to increase upper harmonic material, and will also create audible delays if
playback is stopped. The feedback signal can be inverted using the Ø button, which results in a
“hollow” sound when combined with high feedback values.
Output sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal.
Warmth adds slight distortion and filtering for a warmer sound. Turn it up for more crunch!
Dry/Wet adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100% when using
Chorus-Ensemble in a return track. Note that this is disabled in Vibrato mode.
28.8. 1 Chorus-Ensemble Tips
Here are some tips for using Chorus-Ensemble:
Use Ensemble mode at a rate between 1 Hz and 1.8 Hz and 100% Amount on dry guitars to
create a typical surf-rock sound.
Automate the Feedback Invert toggle at Feedback levels > 90% to create massive bursts of
decaying oscillations.
• 
• 
5 16

--- PAGE 517 ---
28.9 Compressor
The Compressor Effect.
A compressor reduces gain for signals above a user-settable threshold. Compression reduces the
levels of peaks, opening up more headroom and allowing the overall signal level to be turned up. This
gives the signal a higher average level, resulting in a sound that is subjectively louder and ”punchier”
than an uncompressed signal.
A compressor’s two most important parameters are the Threshold and the compression Ratio.
The Threshold slider sets where compression begins. Signals above the threshold are attenuated by an
amount specified by the Ratio parameter, which sets the ratio between the input and output signal. For
example, with a compression ratio of 3, if a signal above the threshold increases by 3 dB, the
compressor output will increase by only 1 dB. If a signal above the threshold increases by 6 dB, then
the output will increase by only 2 dB. A ratio of 1 means no compression, regardless of the threshold.
The orange Gain Reduction meter shows how much the gain is being reduced at any given moment.
The more reduction, the more audible the effect; a gain reduction above 6 dB or so might produce the
desired loudness, but significantly alters the sound and is easily capable of destroying its dynamic
structure. This is something that cannot be undone in later production steps. Keep this in mind
especially when using a compressor, limiter, or sound loudness-maximizing tool in the Main track.
Less is often more here.
Because compression reduces the volume of loud signals and opens up headroom, you can use the
Output (Out) control so that the peaks once again hit the maximum available headroom. The Output
meter shows the output signal’s level. Enabling the Makeup button automatically compensates the
output level if the threshold and ratio settings change.
Dry/Wet adjusts the balance between the compressed and uncompressed signals. At 100%, only the
compressed signal is heard, while at 0%, the device is effectively bypassed.
5 1 7

--- PAGE 518 ---
The Knee control adjusts how gradually or abruptly compression occurs as the threshold is
approached. With a setting of 0 dB, no compression is applied to signals below the threshold, and full
compression is applied to any signal at or above the threshold. With very high ratios, this so-called
”hard knee” behavior can sound harsh. With higher (or ”soft”) knee values, the compressor begins
compressing gradually as the threshold is approached. For example, with a 10 dB knee and a -20 dB
threshold, subtle compression will begin at -30 dB and increase so that signals at -10 dB will be fully
compressed.
Compressor’s display can be switched between several modes via switches in the bottom corners of
the display:
The Collapsed view shows only the essential controls.
Compressor’s Collapsed View.
The Transfer Curve shows the input level on the horizontal axis and output level vertically. This
view is useful for setting the Knee parameter, which is visible as a pair of dotted lines around
the threshold.
• 
• 
5 1 8

--- PAGE 519 ---
Compressor’s Transfer Curve.
The Activity view shows the level of the input signal in light gray. In this mode, the GR and
Output switches toggle between showing the amount of gain reduction in orange or the output
level in a darker gray. These views are useful for visualizing what’s happening to the signal over
time.
Compression Activity Display, Showing Input and Output.
The Attack and Release controls are essential parameters for controlling the response time of
Compressor by defining how fast it reacts to input-level changes.
Attack defines how long it takes to reach maximum compression once a signal exceeds the threshold,
while Release sets how long it takes for the compressor to return to normal operation after the signal
falls below the threshold. With Auto Release enabled, the release time will adjust automatically based
on the incoming audio.
• 
5 1 9

--- PAGE 520 ---
A slight amount of attack time (10-50 ms) allows peaks to come through unprocessed, which helps
preserve dynamics by accentuating the initial portion of the signal. If these peaks cause overloads,
you can try shortening the attack time, but extremely short times take the ”life” out of the signal, and
may lead to a slight “buzziness” caused by distortion. Short release times can cause ”pumping” as
the compressor tries to figure out whether to compress or not; while generally considered an
undesirable effect, some engineers use it on full drum kits to give unusual ”sucking” effects. Careful
adjustment of attack and release times is essential when it comes to compression of rhythmical
sources. If you are not used to working with compressors, play a drum loop and spend some time
adjusting Attack, Release, Threshold and Gain. It can be very exciting!
A compressor can only react to an input signal once it occurs. Since it also needs to apply an attack/
release envelope, the compression is always a bit too late. A digital compressor can solve this
problem by simply delaying the input signal a little bit. Compressor offers three different Lookahead
times: zero ms, one ms and ten ms. The results may sound pretty different depending on this setting.
Compressor can be switched between three basic modes of operation. With Peak selected,
Compressor reacts to short peaks within a signal. This mode is more aggressive and precise, and so
works well for limiting tasks where you need to ensure that there are absolutely no signals over the set
threshold. RMS mode causes Compressor to be less sensitive to very short peaks and compress only
when the incoming level has exceeded the threshold for a slightly longer time. RMS is closer to how
people actually perceive loudness and is usually considered more musical. Expand mode lets you set
the ratio of expansion between the input and output level. For example, a ratio of 1 to 2 means that
for every 1 dB of input above the threshold level, the output level will increase by 2 dB. A ratio of 1 to
1 results in no expansion. For more information about the various types of dynamics processing, see
the Multiband Dynamics section.
In addition to these modes, Compressor can be switched between two envelope follower shapes that
offer further options for how the device measures and responds to signal levels. In linear (Lin) mode,
the speed of the compression response is determined entirely by the Attack and Release values. In
logarithmic (Log) mode, sharply compressed peaks will have a faster release time than less
compressed material. This can result in smoother and less noticeable compression than Lin mode.
Note that the Lin/Log switch is not visible in Compressor’s collapsed view.
28.9. 1 Sidechain Parameters
The Compressor Device With Sidechain Section.
520

--- PAGE 521 ---
Normally, the signal being compressed and the input source that triggers the compressor are the same
signal. But by using sidechaining, it is possible to compress a signal based on the level of another
signal or a specific frequency component. To access the Sidechain parameters, unfold the
Compressor window by toggling the  button in its title bar.
The sidechain parameters are divided into two sections. On the left are the external controls. Enabling
this section with the Sidechain button allows you to select any of Live’s internal routing points from the
choosers below. This causes the selected source to act as the compressor’s trigger, instead of the
signal that is actually being compressed.
The Gain knob adjusts the level of the external sidechain’s input, while the Dry/Wet knob allows you
to use a combination of sidechain and original signal as the compressor’s trigger. With Dry/Wet at
100%, the compressor is triggered entirely by the sidechain source. At 0%, the sidechain is effectively
bypassed. Note that increasing the gain does not increase the volume of the source signal in the mix.
The sidechain audio is only a trigger for the compressor and is never actually heard.
Note that automatic Makeup is not available when using external sidechain.
On the right of the external section are the controls for the sidechain EQ. Enabling this section causes
the compressor to be triggered by a specific band of frequencies, instead of a complete signal. These
can either be frequencies in the compressed signal or, by using the EQ in conjunction with an external
sidechain, frequencies in another track’s audio.
The headphones button between the external and EQ sections allows you to listen to only the
sidechain input, bypassing the compressor’s output. Since the sidechain audio isn’t fed to the output,
and is only a trigger for the compressor, this temporary listening option can make it much easier to set
sidechain parameters and hear what’s actually making the compressor work.
28.9.2 Compressor Tips
This section presents some tips for using Compressor effectively, particularly with the sidechain
options.
28.9.2. 1 Mixing a Voiceover
Sidechaining is commonly used for so-called ”ducking” effects. For example, imagine that you have
one track containing a voiceover and another track containing background music. Since you want the
voiceover to always be the loudest source in the mix, the background music must get out of the way
every time the narrator is speaking. To do this automatically, insert a Compressor on the music track,
but select the narration track’s output as the external sidechain source.
28.9.2.2 Sidechaining in Dance Music
Sidechaining/ducking is a dance music producer’s secret weapon because it can help to ensure that
basslines (or even whole mixes) always make room for the kick drum. By inserting a compressor on
52 1

--- PAGE 522 ---
the bass (or Main) track and using the kick drum’s track as the sidechain input, you can help to control
problematic low frequencies that might interfere with the kick drum’s attack.
Using the sidechain EQ in conjunction with this technique can create ducking effects even if you only
have a mixed drum track to work with (as opposed to an isolated kick drum). In this case, insert the
Compressor on the track you want to duck. Then choose the drum track as the external sidechain
source. Then enable the sidechain EQ and select the low-pass filter. By carefully adjusting the
Frequency and Q settings, you should be able to isolate the kick drum from the rest of the drum mix.
Using the sidechain listen mode can help you tune the EQ until you find settings you’re happy with.
Note that Compressor’s internal algorithms were updated in Live 9, in collaboration with Dr. Joshua D.
Reiss of the Centre for Digital Music, Queen Mary University of London.
28. 10 Corpus
The Corpus Effect.
Corpus is an effect that simulates the acoustic characteristics of seven types of resonant objects.
Developed in collaboration with Applied Acoustics Systems, Corpus uses physical modeling
technology to provide a wide range of parameters and modulation options.
522

--- PAGE 523 ---
28. 10. 1 Resonator Parameters
Corpus’s Resonator Parameters.
The Resonance Type chooser allows you to select from seven types of physically modeled resonant
objects:
Beam simulates the resonance properties of beams of different materials and sizes.
Marimba, a specialized variant of the Beam model, reproduces the characteristic tuning of
marimba bar overtones which are produced as a result of the deep arch-cut of the bars.
String simulates the sound produced by strings of different materials and sizes.
Membrane is a model of a rectangular membrane (such as a drum head) with a variable size
and construction.
Plate simulates sound production by a rectangular plate (a flat surface) of different materials
and sizes.
Pipe simulates a cylindrical tube that is fully open at one end and has a variable opening at the
other (adjusted with the Opening parameter).
Tube simulates a cylindrical tube that is fully open at both ends.
The Resonator Quality chooser controls the trade-off between the sound quality of the resonators and
performance by reducing the number of overtones that are calculated. Eco uses minimal CPU
resources, while High creates more sophisticated resonances. This parameter is not used with the Pipe
or Tube resonators.
The Decay slider adjusts the amount of internal damping in the resonator, and thus the decay time.
The Material slider adjusts the variation of the damping at different frequencies. At lower values, low
frequency components decay slower than high frequency components (which simulates objects made
of wood, nylon or rubber). At higher values, high frequency components decay slower (which
simulates objects made of glass or metal). This parameter is not used with the Pipe or Tube resonators.
The Radius slider is only available for the Pipe and Tube resonators, and appears in place of the
Material parameter mentioned above. Radius adjusts the radius of the pipe or tube. As the radius
increases, the decay time and high frequency sustain both increase. At very large sizes, the
fundamental pitch of the resonator also changes.
The Decay and Material/Radius parameters can also be controlled with the X-Y controller.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
523

--- PAGE 524 ---
The Bright knob adjusts the amplitude of various frequency components. At higher values, higher
frequencies are louder. This parameter is not used with the Pipe or Tube resonators.
Inharm (Inharmonics) adjusts the pitch of the resonator’s harmonics. At negative values, frequencies
are compressed, increasing the number of lower partials. At positive values, frequencies are stretched,
increasing the number of upper partials. This parameter is not used with the Pipe or Tube resonators.
Opening, which is only available for the Pipe resonator, scales between an open and closed pipe. At
0%, the pipe is fully closed on one side, while at 100% the pipe is open at both ends.
Ratio, which is only available for the Membrane and Plate resonators, adjusts the ratio of the
membrane/plate along its x and y axes.
The Hit knob adjusts the location on the resonator at which the object is struck or otherwise activated.
At 0%, the object is hit at its center. Higher values move the activation point closer to the edge. This
parameter is not used with the Pipe or Tube resonators.
The Width slider adjusts the stereo mix between the left and right resonators. At 0%, both resonators
are fed equally to each side, resulting in mono output. At 100%, each resonator is sent exclusively to
one channel.
The Pos. L and Pos. R controls adjust the location on the left and right resonator where the vibrations
are measured. At 0%, the resonance is monitored at the object’s center. Higher values move the
listening point closer to the edge. These parameters are not used with the Pipe or Tube resonators,
which are always measured in the middle of their permanently open end.
The Tune knob adjusts the frequency of the resonator in Hertz. When MIDI Frequency is enabled in
Corpus’s Sidechain section, the knob can be used to adjust the coarse tuning of the MIDI modulation.
The Fine knob allows for fine tuning MIDI modulation in cents when sidechain MIDI Frequency is
enabled.
Spread detunes the two resonators in relation to each other. Positive values raise the pitch of the left
resonator while lowering the pitch of the right one, while negative values do the opposite. At 0%, the
resonators are tuned the same.
524

--- PAGE 525 ---
28. 10.2 LFO Section
Corpus’s LFO Section.
Corpus contains a Low Frequency Oscillator (LFO) to modulate the resonant frequency. The Amount
control sets how much the LFO affects the frequency.
The Rate control specifies the LFO speed. It can be set in terms of Hertz, or synced to the song tempo,
allowing for controlled rhythmic modulation.
Available LFO waveform shapes are sine (creates smooth modulations with rounded peaks and
valleys), square, triangle, sawtooth up, sawtooth down and two types of noise (stepped and smooth).
Although only one set of LFO controls is visible, there are actually two LFOs, one for each stereo
channel. The Phase and Spin controls define the relationship between these two LFOs.
Phase keeps both LFOs at the same frequency, but can set the two LFO waveforms ”out of phase” with
each other, creating stereo movement. When set to 1 80, the LFO outputs are 1 80 degrees apart, so
that when one LFO reaches its peak, the other is at its minimum. With Phase set to 360 or 0 the two
LFOs run in sync.
When the LFOs are synced to song tempo, an additional Offset knob is available, which shifts the start
point of the LFO along its waveform.
Spin (only available when the LFOs are in Hertz mode) detunes the two LFO speeds relative to each
other. Each stereo channel is modulated at a different frequency, as determined by the Spin amount.
Phase or Spin can be chosen when the LFOs are in Hertz mode using the LFO Stereo mode icons.
525

--- PAGE 526 ---
The LFO Stereo Mode Icons.
For the noise waveforms, the Phase and Spin controls are not relevant and do not affect the sound.
28. 10.3 Filter Section
Corpus’s Filter Section.
The processed signal can be fed through a band-pass filter that can be toggled on or off with the Filter
switch.
The Freq knob adjusts the center frequency of the filter while Bdwidth adjusts the bandwidth of the
filter.
526

--- PAGE 527 ---
28. 10.4 Global Parameters
Corpus’s Global Parameters.
Bleed mixes a portion of the unprocessed signal with the resonated signal. At higher values, more of
the original signal is applied. This is useful for restoring high frequencies, which can often be damped
when the tuning or quality are set to low values. This parameter is deactivated with the Pipe or Tube
resonators.
Gain boosts or attenuates the level of the processed signal. Corpus contains a built-in limiter that
automatically activates when the audio level is too high. This is indicated by the LED next to the Gain
knob.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the dry input signal and the signal sent to Corpus’s
processing. Turning Dry/Wet down will not cut resonances that are currently sounding, but rather stop
new input signals from being processed.
28. 10.5 Sidechain Parameters
Corpus’s Sidechain Parameters.
The frequency and/or decay rate of the resonance can be MIDI-modulated by enabling the
Frequency and/or Off Decay switches in the Sidechain section. Toggle the  button in Corpus’s title
bar to access Sidechain parameters. This button will light up if the sidechain is active.
527

--- PAGE 528 ---
The MIDI From choosers allow you to select the MIDI track and tapping point from which to receive
MIDI note information.
With Frequency enabled, the tuning of the resonance is determined by the incoming MIDI note. If
multiple notes are held simultaneously, the Last/Low switch determines whether the last or the lowest
note will have priority. The Transpose and Fine knobs in the Resonator section allow for coarse and
fine offset of the MIDI-modulated tuning. PB Range sets the range in semitones of pitch bend
modulation.
With Frequency deactivated, the Tune control in the Resonator section adjusts the base frequency of
the resonance in Hertz. The corresponding MIDI note number and fine tuning offset in cents is
displayed below.
Enabling Off Decay causes MIDI Note Off messages to mute the resonance. The slider below the
switch determines the extent to which MIDI Note Off messages mute the resonance. At 0%, Note Offs
are ignored, and the decay time is based only on the value of the Decay parameter, which can be
adjusted using the X-Y controller or Decay slider. This is similar to how real-world mallet instruments
such as marimbas and glockenspiels behave. At 100%, the resonance is muted immediately at Note
Off, regardless of the Decay time.
28. 1 1 Delay
The Delay Effect.
The Delay provides two independent delay lines, one for each channel (left and right).
To refer delay time to the song tempo, activate the Sync switch, which allows using the Delay Time
beat division chooser. The numbered switches represent time delay in 16th notes. For example,
selecting ”4” delays the signal by four 16th notes, which equals one beat (a quarter note) of delay.
528

--- PAGE 529 ---
If the Sync switch is off, the delay time reverts to milliseconds. In this case, to edit the delay time, click
and drag up the Delay Time knob.
With Stereo Link engaged, the left channel’s settings are applied to the right channel, and changing
either channel’s Sync switch or Delay Time settings will apply the changes to both sides.
The Feedback parameter defines how much of each channel’s output signal feeds back into the delay
lines’ inputs. Internally, they are two independent feedback loops, so a signal on the left channel does
not feed back into the right channel and vice versa.
The  button will cause the delay to endlessly cycle the audio which is in its buffer at the moment
that the button is pressed, ignoring any new input until Freeze is disabled.
The delay is preceded by a band-pass filter that can be toggled on and off with a switch, and
controlled with an X-Y controller. To define the filter bandwidth, click and drag on the vertical axis. To
set the position of the frequency band, click and drag on the horizontal axis.
Filter frequency and delay time can be modulated by an LFO, making it possible to achieve a range
of sounds from light chorus-like effects through to heavy contorted noise. The Rate slider sets the
frequency of the modulation oscillator in Hertz. The Filter slider adjusts the amount of modulation that
is applied to the filter, and the Time slider adjusts the amount of modulation that is applied to the delay
time.
Changing the delay time while Delay is processing audio can cause abrupt changes in the sound of
the delayed signal. You can choose between three delay transition modes:
Repitch causes a pitch variation when changing the delay time, similar to the behavior of old
tape delay units. Repitch mode is the default option.
Fade creates a crossfade between the old and new delay times. This sounds a bit similar to time
stretching if the delay time is gradually changed.
Jump immediately jumps to the new delay time. Note that this will cause an audible click if the
delay time is changed while delays are sounding.
Tip: Try using the Time slider to explore the effect of time modulation on the different transition modes.
When the Ping Pong switch is activated, the signal jumps from the left to the right output.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100
percent when using Delay in a return track. The Dry/Wet parameter’s context menu lets you toggle
Equal-Loudness. When enabled, a 50/50 mix will sound equally loud for most signals.
Sets saved in versions of Live older than Live 10. 1 that used Simple Delay or Ping Pong Delay devices
will show an Upgrade button in the title bar of each instance of Delay when loading the Set.
Upgrading the device will preserve the previously used device’s free delay time range, and will only
affect the sound of the Set or preset if the free delay time parameter was either mapped to a Macro
Control or to a Max for Live device.
• 
• 
• 
529

--- PAGE 530 ---
28. 1 1. 1 Delay Tips
28. 1 1. 1. 1 Glitch Effect
Enable the Stereo Link switch and set the delay time to around 400-500ms. Dial the Feedback to
80% or above. Disable the band-pass filter, adjust the Filter slider to 0%, and set the Time slider to
100%. Select the Fade transition mode and make sure Ping Pong is disabled. Set the Dry/Wet control
to 80% or above.
28. 1 1. 1.2 Chorus Effect
Disable the Stereo Link switch, set the left channel’s delay time to 1 2ms, and adjust the right channel’s
delay time to 1 7ms. Dial the Feedback to 60%. Enable the band-pass filter, set the Filter Frequency to
750 Hz, and adjust the Width slider to 6.5. Set the Rate slider to 5 Hz, bring the Filter slider to 10%,
and dial the Time slider to 1 2%. Select the Repitch transition mode and enable the Ping Pong switch.
28. 1 2 Drum Buss
The Drum Buss Effect.
Drum Buss is an analog-style drum processor that was designed to add body and character to a
group of drums, while gluing them together in a tight mix.
530

--- PAGE 531 ---
The Trim slider lets you reduce the input level before any processing is applied to the signal.
The Comp toggle applies a fixed compressor to the input signal before it is processed by the
distortion. The compressor is optimized for balancing out groups of drums, with fast attack, medium
release and moderate ratio settings, as well as ample makeup gain.
There are three types of distortion which can be applied to the input signal. Each distortion type adds
an increasing degree of distortion, while lending its own character to the overall sound:
Soft: waveshaping distortion
Medium: limiting distortion
Hard: clipping distortion with bass boost
For more intensity, it is possible to drive the input prior to distorting it. The Drive control lets you
determine how much drive is applied to the input signal.
Drum Buss combines commonly-used drum processing tools for shaping the mid-high range and filling
out the low end, which we will look at in the following sections.
28. 1 2.0. 1 Mid-High Frequency Shaping
The mid-high frequency shaping tools are designed to add clarity and presence to drums such as
snares and hi-hats.
Crunch adjusts the amount of sine-shaped distortion applied to mid-high frequencies.
The Damp control is a low-pass filter, which removes unwanted high frequencies that can occur after
adding distortion.
The Transients knob emphasizes or de-emphasizes the transients of frequencies above 100 Hz.
Positive values add attack and increase sustain, resulting in a full, “punchy” sound. Negative values
also add attack, but decrease sustain. This tightens up the drums, giving them a sharper, more crisp
sound with less room and rattle.
28. 1 2.0.2 Low-End Enhancement
Drum Buss’s low-end enhancement is made up of two tools: a resonant filter, which dramatically
boosts bass frequencies, as well as a Decay control, which allows you to adjust the decay rate of both
the incoming audio and the signal processed by the resonant filter. These tools help you to fill out the
low-end of your drums.
The Boom knob adjusts the amount of low-end enhancement that the resonant filter produces. The
Bass Meter lets you see the Boom’s effect on the signal, which can be particularly useful if you can’t
hear it.
The Freq knob adjusts the frequency of the low-end enhancer. Force To Note lets you tune the low-end
enhancer by setting its frequency to the value of the nearest MIDI note.
• 
• 
• 
53 1

--- PAGE 532 ---
The Decay control adjusts the decay rate of the low frequencies. When the Boom amount is set to 0%,
the decay affects the incoming (post-drive and distortion) signal only. When the “Boom Level” is
adjusted above 0%, the decay affects both the incoming and processed signals.
To solo the result of the low-frequency enhancer, enable Boom Audition via the headphone icon.
28. 1 2.0.3 Output
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals.
The Output Gain slider sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal.
28. 13 Dynamic Tube
The Dynamic Tube Effect.
The Dynamic Tube effect infuses sounds with the peculiarities of tube saturation. An integrated
envelope follower generates dynamic tonal variations related to the level of the input signal.
Three tube models, A, B and C, provide a range of distortion characteristics known from real amplifier
tubes. Tube A does not produce distortions if Bias is set low, but will kick in whenever the input signal
exceeds a certain threshold, creating bright harmonics. Tube C is a very poor tube amp that produces
distortions all the time. The qualities of Tube B lie somewhere between these two extremes.
532

--- PAGE 533 ---
The Tone control sets the spectral distribution of the distortions, directing them into the higher registers,
or through the midrange and deeper.
The Drive control determines how much signal reaches the tube; greater Drive yields a dirtier output.
The intensity of the tube is controlled by the Bias dial, which pushes the signal into the celebrated
realms of nonlinear distortion. With very high amounts of Bias, the signal will really start to break
apart.
The Bias parameter can be positively or negatively modulated by an envelope follower, which is
controlled with the Envelope knob. The more deeply the envelope is applied, the more the Bias point
will be influenced by the level of the input signal. Negative Envelope values create expansion effects
by reducing distortion on loud signals, while positive values will make loud sounds dirtier.
Attack and Release are envelope characteristics that define how quickly the envelope reacts to
volume changes in the input signal. Together, they shape the dynamic nature of the distortions. Note
that if Envelope is set to zero, they will have no effect.
Cut or boost the device’s final signal level with the Output dial.
Aliasing can be reduced by enabling Hi-Quality mode, which can be accessed via the device title
bar’s context menu. This improves the sound quality, particularly with high frequency signals, but there
is a slight increase in CPU usage.
28. 1 4 Echo
The Echo Effect.
Echo is a modulation delay effect that lets you set the delay time on two independent delay lines,
while giving you control over envelope and filter modulation.
The Channel Mode buttons let you choose between three different modes: Stereo, Ping Pong and
Mid/Side.
533

--- PAGE 534 ---
The Left and Right delay line controls let you choose the delay time, which can be set in beat divisions
or milliseconds, depending on the state of the Sync switch. Note that when the Mid/Side channel
mode is selected, the Left and Right delay line controls are replaced with Mid and Side knobs.
You can use the Sync Mode choosers to select one of the following beat-synced modes: Notes,
Triplet, Dotted and 16th. Note that when switching between Sync Modes, the resulting changes are
only audible while the Sync switch is set to Sync.
When Stereo Link is engaged, changing either channel’s delay line control, Sync switch or Sync
Mode settings will apply the changes to both sides.
Changing the Delay Offset sliders shortens or extends the delay time by fractional amounts, thus
producing the ”swing” type of timing effect found in drum machines. Note that when Stereo Link is
enabled, the Delay Offset can still be adjusted individually for the two delay lines.
The Input knob sets the amount of gain applied to the dry signal. To apply distortion to the dry signal,
press the “D” button.
The Feedback parameter defines how much of each channel’s output signal feeds back into the delay
lines’ inputs. The “Ø“ button inverts each channel’s output signal before adding it back to their inputs.
28. 1 4. 1 Echo Tab
The Echo tab provides a visualization and control of the delay lines and filter parameters.
Echo’s Tunnel Visualization.
The Echo Tunnel’s circular lines represent the individual repeats, progressing from the outside of the
tunnel to its center. The distance between the lines indicates the time between the repeats, and the
white dots in the middle form a fixed 1/8th note grid for reference. You can adjust the delay times for
each delay line by clicking and dragging in the display.
534

--- PAGE 535 ---
Echo’s Filter.
The Filter toggle enables a high-pass and low-pass filter. The HP slider adjusts the cutoff frequency of
the high-pass filter and the adjacent Res slider adjusts the high-pass filter’s resonance. The LP slider
adjusts the cutoff frequency of the low-pass filter, and you can use the Res slider on the right side to
adjust the low-pass filter’s resonance.
The Filter Display makes it possible to visualize the filter curves. To show or hide the Filter Display, use
the triangular toggle button. You can also adjust the filter parameters by clicking and dragging either
of the filter dots in the Filter Display.
28. 1 4.2 Modulation Tab
Echo’s Modulation tab contains an LFO that modulates filter frequency and delay time, and an
envelope follower that can be blended with the LFO.
Echo’s Modulation Tab.
You can choose from one of six different modulation waveforms including sine, triangle, sawtooth up,
sawtooth down, square, and noise. The selected waveform will appear in the display, which you can
drag to adjust the modulation frequency.
When Sync is enabled, modulation is synchronized to the song tempo. You can use the Rate slider to
set the frequency of the modulation oscillator in beat divisions. When Sync is disabled, you can use
the Freq slider to adjust frequency of the modulation oscillator in Hertz.
535

--- PAGE 536 ---
Phase adjusts the amount of offset between the waveforms for the left and right channel. At 1 80°, the
channels will be perfectly out of phase.
Mod Delay adjusts the amount of modulation that is applied to the delay time. Modulation x4 scales
the delay time modulation depth by a factor of four. With short delay times, this produces deep
flanging sounds.
Mod Filter adjusts the amount of modulation that is applied to the filter.
Env Mix blends between the modulation oscillator and an envelope follower. At 100%, only the
envelope’s modulation will be heard. At 0%, only the LFO’s modulation will be heard.
28. 1 4.3 Character Tab
Echo’s Character tab contains parameters that control dynamics and add imperfections to your sound.
Echo’s Character Tab.
Gate enables a gate at Echo’s input. It mutes the signal components below its threshold. Threshold sets
the threshold level that incoming audio signals must exceed in order to open the gate. Release sets
how long it takes for the gate to close after the signal has dropped below the threshold.
When Ducking is enabled, the wet signal is proportionally reduced as long as there is an input signal.
Ducking begins to affect the output signal when the input level exceeds the set Threshold. Release sets
how long it takes for ducking to stop after the input signal drops below the threshold.
When enabled, Noise introduces noise to simulate the character of vintage equipment. You can adjust
the Amount of noise added to the signal, and Morph between different types of noise.
When enabled, Wobble adds an irregular modulation of the delay time to simulate tape delays. You
can adjust the Amount of wobble added to the signal, and Morph between different types of wobble
modulation.
Repitch causes a pitch variation when changing the delay time, similar to the behavior of hardware
delay units. When Repitch is disabled, changing the delay time creates a crossfade between the old
and new delay times.
536

--- PAGE 537 ---
Note that in order to save CPU, the Echo device turns itself off at least eight seconds after its input
stops producing sound. However, Echo will not switch off if both the Noise and Gate parameters are
enabled.
28. 1 4.4 Global Controls
The Reverb knob sets the amount of reverb added, and you use the Reverb Location chooser to set
where the reverb is added in the processing chain: pre delay, post delay, or within the feedback loop.
Use the Decay slider to lengthen or shorten the reverb tail.
The Stereo control sets the stereo width of the wet signal. 0% yields a mono signal whereas values
above 100% create a widened stereo panorama.
The Output sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal. The Dry/Wet control adjusts the
balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100 percent when using Echo in a return
track. The Dry/Wet parameter’s context menu lets you toggle Equal-Loudness. When enabled, a
50/50 mix will sound equally loud for most signals.
28. 1 5 EQ Eight
The EQ Eight Effect.
The EQ Eight effect is an equalizer featuring up to eight parametric filters per input channel, useful for
changing a sound’s timbre.
The input signal can be processed using one of three modes: Stereo, L/R and M/S. Stereo mode uses
a single curve to filter both channels of a stereo input equally. L/R mode provides an independently
adjustable filter curve for the left and right channels of a stereo input; M/S mode (Mid/Side)
provides the same functionality for signals that have been recorded using M/S encoding. In all
modes, the frequency spectrum of the output is displayed behind the filter curves when the Analyze
switch is on.
537

--- PAGE 538 ---
When using the L/R and M/S modes, both curves are displayed simultaneously for reference,
although only the active channel is editable. The Edit switch indicates the active channel, and is used
to toggle between the two curves.
Each filter has a chooser that allows you to switch between eight responses. From top to bottom in the
choosers, these are:
48 or 1 2 dB/octave Low cut (cuts frequencies below the specified frequency);
Low shelf (boosts or cuts frequencies lower than the specified frequency);
Peak (boosts or cuts over a range of frequencies);
Notch (sharply cuts frequencies within a narrow range);
High shelf (boosts or cuts frequencies higher than the specified frequency);
1 2 or 48 dB/octave High cut (cuts frequencies above the specified frequency).
Each filter band can be turned on or off independently with an activator switch below the chooser.
Turn off bands that are not in use to save CPU power. To achieve really drastic filtering effects, assign
the same parameters to two or more filters.
To edit the filter curve, click and drag on the filter dots in the display. Drag-enclose multiple filter dots
to adjust them simultaneously, either with the mouse or with your computer keyboard’s arrow keys.
Horizontal movement changes the filter frequency, while vertical movement adjusts the filter band’s
gain. To adjust the filter Q (also called resonance or bandwidth), hold down the Alt (Win) / 
Option (Mac) modifier while dragging the mouse. Note that the gain cannot be adjusted for the low
cut, notch and high cut filters. In these modes, vertical dragging adjusts the filter Q.
To get an even better view, you can toggle the location of the display between the device chain and
Live’s main window by clicking the  button in EQ Eight’s title bar. When using this expanded view,
all eight filters can be edited simultaneously in the Device View.
EQ Eight’s Controls With the Display Expanded.
By default, EQ Eight’s output spectrum is shown in the display. If you would prefer to work entirely “by
ear,” you can turn off the Analyze button to disable the spectrum view.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
538

--- PAGE 539 ---
With Adaptive Q enabled, the Q amount increases as the amount of boost or cut increases. This
results in a more consistent output volume and is based on the behavior of classic analog EQs.
To temporarily solo a single filter, enable Audition mode via the headphone icon. In Audition mode,
clicking and holding on a filter dot allows you to hear only that filter’s effect on the output.
You can also select a band for editing by clicking near its number and then edit parameter values with
the Freq, Gain and Q dials (and/or type values into the number fields below each dial).
As boosting will increase levels and cutting will decrease levels, use the global Gain slider to optimize
the output level for maximum level consistent with minimum distortion.
The Scale field will adjust the gain of all filters that support gain (all except low cut, notch and high
cut).
28. 1 5.0. 1 Context Menu Options for EQ Eight
Several of EQ Eight’s controls are only available via the device title bar’s context menu. These include:
Oversampling - enabling this option causes EQ Eight to internally process two times the current
sample rate, which allows for smoother filter behavior when adjusting high frequencies. There is
a slight increase in CPU usage with Oversampling enabled.
• 
539

--- PAGE 540 ---
28. 1 6 EQ Three
The EQ Three Effect.
If you have ever used a good DJ mixer you will know what this is: An EQ that allows you to adjust the
level of low, mid and high frequencies independently.
Each band can be adjusted from -infinite dB to +6 dB using the gain controls. This means that you can
completely remove, for example, the bass drum or bassline of a track, while leaving the other
frequencies untouched.
You can also turn on or off each band using the On/Off buttons located under the gain controls.
These buttons are especially handy if assigned to computer keys.
EQ Three gives you visual confirmation of the presence of a signal in each frequency band using three
LEDs. Even if a band is turned off, you can tell if there is something going on in it. The internal threshold
for the LEDs is set to -24 dB.
The frequency range of each band is defined via two crossover controls: FreqLo and FreqHi. If FreqLo
is set to 500 Hz and FreqHi to 2000 Hz, then the low band goes from 0 Hz to 500 Hz, the mid band
from 500 Hz to 2000 Hz and the high band from 2000 Hz up to whatever your soundcard or
sample rate supports.
A very important control is the 24 dB/48 dB switch. It defines how sharp the filters are cutting the
signal at the crossover frequency. The higher setting results in more drastic filtering, but needs more
CPU.
540

--- PAGE 541 ---
Note: The filters in this device are optimized to sound more like a good, powerful analog filter
cascade than a clean digital filter. The 48 dB Mode especially does not provide a perfect linear
transfer quality, resulting in a slight coloration of the input signal even if all controls are set to 0.00 dB.
This is typical behavior for this kind of filter, and is part of EQ Three’s unique sound. If you need a
more linear behavior choose 24 dB Mode or use the EQ Eight.
28. 1 7 Erosion
The Erosion Effect.
The Erosion effect degrades the input signal by modulating a short delay with filtered noise or a sine
wave. This adds noisy artifacts or aliasing/downsampling-like distortions that sound very ”digital.”
To change the sine wave frequency or noise band center frequency, click and drag along the X-axis in
the X-Y field. The Y-axis controls the modulation amount. If you hold down the Alt (Win) / Option
(Mac) modifier key while clicking in the X-Y field, the Y-axis controls the bandwidth. Note that
bandwidth is not adjustable when Sine is selected.
The Frequency control determines the color, or quality, of the distortion. If the Mode control is set to
Noise, this works in conjunction with the Width control, which defines the noise bandwidth. Lower
values lead to more selective distortion frequencies, while higher values affect the entire input signal.
Width has no effect in Sine Mode.
Noise and Sine use a single modulation generator. However, Wide Noise has independent noise
generators for the left and right channels, which creates a subtle stereo enhancement.
541

--- PAGE 542 ---
28. 1 8 External Audio Effect
The External Audio Effect.
The External Audio Effect is a bit different than Live’s other effects devices. Instead of processing audio
itself, it allows you to use external (hardware) effects processors within a track’s device chain.
The Audio To chooser selects the outputs on your computer’s audio hardware that will go to your
external device, while the Audio From chooser selects the inputs that will bring the processed signal
back into Live. As with the track inputs and outputs, the list of available inputs and outputs depends on
the Audio Settings, which can be reached via the ”Configure…” option at the bottom of each chooser.
Below each chooser is a Peak level indicator that shows the highest audio level attained. Click on the
indicators to reset them.
The Gain knobs next to the choosers adjust the levels going out of and back into Live. These levels
should be set carefully to avoid clipping, both in your external hardware and when returning the
audio to your computer.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100
percent if using the External Audio Effect in a return track.
The Invert button inverts the phase of the processed signal coming back into Live.
Since hardware effects introduce latency that Live cannot automatically detect, you can manually
compensate for any delays by adjusting the Hardware Latency slider. The button next to this slider
allows you to set your latency compensation amount in either milliseconds or samples. If your external
device connects to Live via a digital connection, you will want to adjust your latency settings in
542

--- PAGE 543 ---
samples, which ensures that the number of samples you specify will be retained even when changing
the sample rate. If your external device connects to Live via an analog connection, you will want to
adjust your latency settings in milliseconds, which ensures that the amount of time you specify will be
retained when changing the sample rate. Note that adjusting in samples gives you finer control, so
even in cases when you’re working with analog devices, you may want to ”fine tune” your latency in
samples in order to achieve the lowest possible latency. In this case, be sure to switch back to
milliseconds before changing your sample rate.
Note: If the Delay Compensation option is unchecked in the Options menu, the Hardware Latency
slider is disabled.
For instructions on how to accurately set up latency compensation for your hardware, please see the
Driver Error Compensation lesson in Live’s Help View.
28. 1 9 Filter Delay
The Filter Delay Effect.
The Filter Delay provides three independent delay lines, each preceded by linked low-pass and high-
pass filters. This allows applying delay to only certain input signal frequencies, as determined by the
filter settings. The feedback from each of the three delays is also routed back through the filters.
Each of the three delays can be switched on and off independently. The Filter Delay device assigns
delay 1 to the input signal’s left channel, delay 2 to the left and right channels and delay 3 to the right
channel. The Pan controls at the right can override the delay channels’ outputs; otherwise each delay
outputs on the channel from which it derives its input.
Each delay channel’s filter has an associated On switch, located to the left of each X-Y controller. The
X-Y controllers adjust the low-pass and high-pass filters simultaneously for each delay. To edit filter
bandwidth, click and drag on the vertical axis; click and drag on the horizontal axis to set the filter
band’s frequency.
543

--- PAGE 544 ---
To refer delay time to the song tempo, activate the Sync switch, which allows using the Delay Time
beat division chooser. The numbered switches represent time delay in 16th notes. For example,
selecting ”4” delays the signal by four 16th notes, which equals one beat (a quarter note) of delay.
With Sync Mode active, changing the Delay Time field percentage value shortens and extends delay
times by fractional amounts, thus producing the ”swing” type of timing effect found in drum machines.
If the Sync switch is off, the delay time reverts to milliseconds. In this case, to edit the delay time, click
and drag up or down in the Delay Time field, or click in the field and type in a value.
The Feedback parameter sets how much of the output signal returns to the delay line input. Very high
values can lead to runaway feedback and produce a loud oscillation — watch your ears and
speakers if you decide to check out extreme feedback settings!
Each delay channel has its own volume control, which can be turned up to +6 dB to compensate for
drastic filtering at the input.
The Dry control adjusts the unprocessed signal level. Set it to minimum if using Delay in a return track.
28.20 Gate
The Gate Effect.
The Gate effect passes only signals whose level exceeds a user-specified threshold. A gate can
eliminate low-level noise that occurs between sounds (e.g., hiss or hum), or shape a sound by turning
up the threshold so that it cuts off reverb or delay tails or truncates an instrument’s natural decay.
544

--- PAGE 545 ---
Gate’s display area shows the level of the input signal in light gray and the level of the output signal in
a darker gray with a white outline. This allows you to see the amount of gating that is occurring at any
moment, and helps you to set the appropriate parameters.
The Threshold knob sets the gate’s sensitivity. The Threshold value is represented in the display as a
horizontal blue line, which can also be dragged.
Return (also known as “hysteresis”) sets the difference between the level that opens the gate and the
level that closes it. Higher hysteresis values reduce “chatter” caused by the gate rapidly opening and
closing when the input signal is near the threshold level. The Return value is represented in the display
as an additional horizontal orange line.
With the Flip button enabled, the gate works in reverse; the signal will only pass if its level is below the
threshold.
A gate can only react to an input signal once it occurs. Since it also needs to apply an attack/release
envelope, the gating is always a bit too late. A digital gate can solve this problem by simply delaying
the input signal a little bit. Gate offers three different Lookahead times: zero ms, one ms and ten ms.
The results may sound pretty different depending on this setting.
The Attack time determines how long it takes for the gate to switch from closed to open when a signal
goes from below to above the threshold. Very short attack times can produce sharp clicking sounds,
while long times soften the sound’s attack.
When the signal goes from above to below the threshold, the Hold time kicks in. After the hold time
expires, the gate closes over a period of time set by the Release parameter.
The Floor knob sets the amount of attenuation that will be applied when the gate is closed. If set to -inf
dB, a closed gate will mute the input signal. A setting of 0.00 dB means that even if the gate is closed,
there is no effect on the signal. Settings in between these two extremes attenuate the input to a greater
or lesser degree when the gate is closed.
Normally, the signal being gated and the input source that triggers the gate are the same signal. But
by using 
sidechaining, it is possible to gate a signal based on the level of another signal. To access the
Sidechain parameters, unfold the Gate window by toggling the  button in its title bar.
545

--- PAGE 546 ---
Gate’s Sidechain Parameters.
Enabling this section with the Sidechain button allows you to select another track from the choosers
below. This causes the selected track’s signal to act as the gate’s trigger, instead of the signal that is
actually being gated.
The Gain knob adjusts the level of the external sidechain’s input, while the Dry/Wet knob allows you
to use a combination of sidechain and original signal as the gate’s trigger. With Dry/Wet at 100%,
the gate is triggered entirely by the sidechain source. At 0%, the sidechain is effectively bypassed.
Note that increasing the gain does not increase the volume of the source signal in the mix. The
sidechain audio is only a trigger for the gate and is never actually heard.
Sidechain gating can be used to superimpose rhythmic patterns from one source onto another. For
example, a held pad sound can be triggered with the rhythm of a drum loop by inserting a Gate on
the pad’s track and choosing the drum loop’s track as the sidechain input.
On the right of the external section are the controls for the sidechain EQ. Enabling this section causes
the gate to be triggered by a specific band of frequencies, instead of a complete signal. These can
either be frequencies in the signal to be gated or, by using the EQ in conjunction with an external
sidechain, frequencies in another track’s audio.
The headphones button between the external and EQ sections allows you to listen to only the
sidechain input, bypassing the gate’s output. Since the sidechain audio isn’t fed to the output, and is
only a trigger for the gate, this temporary listening option can make it much easier to set sidechain
parameters and hear what’s actually making the gate work. When this button is on, the display area
shows the level of the sidechain input signal in green.
546

--- PAGE 547 ---
28.2 1 Glue Compressor
The Glue Compressor Effect.
The Glue Compressor is an analog-modeled compressor created in collaboration with Cytomic, and
is based on the classic bus compressor from a famous 80’s mixing console. Like Live’s original 
Compressor, the Glue Compressor can be used for basic dynamics control of individual tracks, but is
mainly designed for use on the Main track or a Group Track to “glue” multiple sources together into a
cohesive sounding mix.
The Threshold knob sets where compression begins. Signals above the threshold are attenuated by an
amount specified by the Ratio parameter, which sets the ratio between the input and output signal.
Unlike the Compressor, the Glue Compressor does not have a user-adjustable knee. Instead, the knee
becomes more sharp as the ratio increases.
Attack defines how long it takes to reach maximum compression once a signal exceeds the threshold.
The Attack knob’s values are in milliseconds. Release sets how long it takes for the compressor to
return to normal operation after the signal falls below the threshold. The Release knob’s values are in
seconds. When Release is set to A (Auto), the release time will adjust automatically based on the
incoming audio. The Glue Compressor’s Auto Release actually uses two times - a slow one as a base
compression value, and a fast one to react to transients in the signal. Auto Release may be too slow to
react to sudden changes in level, but generally is a useful way to tame a wide range of material in a
gentle way.
Dry/Wet adjusts the balance between the compressed and uncompressed signals. At 100%, only the
compressed signal is heard, while at 0%, the device is effectively bypassed. Another way of
controlling the amount of compression is with the Range slider, which sets how much compression can
547

--- PAGE 548 ---
occur. Values between about -60 and -70 dB emulate the original hardware, while values between
-40 and -1 5 dB can be useful as an alternative to the Dry/Wet control. At 0 dB, no compression
occurs.
Makeup applies gain to the signal, allowing you to compensate for the reduction in level caused by
compression. A Makeup value that roughly corresponds to the position of the needle in the display
should result in a level close to what you had before compressing.
The Soft clip switch toggles a fixed waveshaper, useful for taming very loud transients. When enabled,
the Glue Compressor’s maximum output level is -.5 dB. Note that with Oversampling enabled, very
loud peaks may still exceed 0 dB. The Soft clipper is not a transparent limiter, and will distort your
signal when active. We recommend leaving it disabled unless this particular type of “colored”
distortion is what you’re looking for.
The Glue Compressor’s needle display shows the amount of gain reduction in dB. The Clip LED turns
red if the device’s output level is exceeding 0 dB. If Soft clipping is enabled, this LED turns yellow to
indicate that peaks are being clipped.
28.2 1. 1 Sidechain Parameters
The Glue Compressor With Sidechain Section.
Normally, the signal being compressed and the input source that triggers the compressor are the same
signal. But by using sidechaining, it is possible to compress a signal based on the level of another
signal or a specific frequency component. To access the Sidechain parameters, unfold the Glue
Compressor window by toggling the  button in its title bar.
The sidechain parameters are divided into two sections. On the left are the external controls. Enabling
this section with the Sidechain button allows you to select any of Live’s internal routing points from the
choosers below. This causes the selected source to act as the Glue Compressor’s trigger, instead of the
signal that is actually being compressed.
The Gain knob adjusts the level of the external sidechain’s input, while the Dry/Wet knob allows you
to use a combination of sidechain and original signal as the Glue Compressor’s trigger. With Dry/
Wet at 100%, the Glue Compressor is triggered entirely by the sidechain source. At 0%, the sidechain
548

--- PAGE 549 ---
is effectively bypassed. Note that increasing the gain does not increase the volume of the source
signal in the mix. The sidechain audio is only a trigger for the Glue Compressor and is never actually
heard.
On the right of the external section are the controls for the sidechain EQ. Enabling this section causes
the Glue Compressor to be triggered by a specific band of frequencies, instead of a complete signal.
These can either be frequencies in the compressed signal or, by using the EQ in conjunction with an
external sidechain, frequencies in another track’s audio.
The headphones button between the external and EQ sections allows you to listen to only the
sidechain input, bypassing the Glue Compressor’s output. Since the sidechain audio isn’t fed to the
output, and is only a trigger for the Glue Compressor, this temporary listening option can make it
much easier to set sidechain parameters and hear what’s actually making the Glue Compressor work.
28.2 1. 1. 1 Context Menu Options for Glue Compressor
Oversampling can be toggled on or off via the device title bar’s context menu. Enabling this option
causes the Glue Compressor to internally process at two times the current sampling rate, which may
reduce aliasing and transient harshness. There is a slight increase in CPU usage with Oversampling
enabled. Note that with Oversampling enabled, the level may exceed 0 dB even with Soft clip
enabled.
28.22 Grain Delay
The Grain Delay Effect.
The Grain Delay effect slices the input signal into tiny particles (called ”grains”) that are then
individually delayed and can also have different pitches compared to the original signal source.
Randomizing pitch and delay time can create complex masses of sound and rhythm that seem to bear
549

--- PAGE 550 ---
little relationship to the source. This can be very useful in creating new sounds and textures, as well as
getting rid of unwelcome house guests, or terrifying small pets (just kidding!).
You can route each parameter to the X-Y controller’s horizontal or vertical axis. To assign a parameter
to the X-axis, choose it from the parameter row below the controller. To assign a parameter to the Y-
axis, use the parameter row on the left side.
To refer delay time to the song tempo, activate the Sync switch, which allows using the Delay Time
beat division chooser. The numbered switches represent time delay in 16th notes. For example,
selecting ”4” delays the signal by four 16th notes, which equals one beat (a quarter note) of delay.
With Sync Mode active, changing the Delay Time field percentage value shortens and extends delay
times by fractional amounts, thus producing the ”swing” type of timing effect found in drum machines.
If the Sync switch is off, the delay time reverts to milliseconds. In this case, to edit the delay time, click
and drag up or down in the Delay Time field, or click in the field and type in a value.
The Delay Time can also be routed to the horizontal axis of the X-Y controller.
The Spray control adds random delay time changes. Low values smear the signal across time, which
adds ”noisiness” to the sound. High Spray values completely break down the structure of the source
signal, introducing varying degrees of rhythmic chaos. This is the recommended setting for anarchists.
The size and duration of each grain is a function of the Frequency parameter. The sound of Pitch and
Spray depends very much on this parameter.
You can transpose the grain pitch with the Pitch parameter, which acts much like a crude pitch shifter.
The Random Pitch control adds random variations to each grain’s pitch. Low values create a sort of
mutant chorusing effect, while high values can make the original source pitch completely
unintelligible. This parameter can interact with the main Pitch control, thus allowing degrees of stability
and instability in a sound’s pitch structure.
The Feedback parameter sets how much of the output signal returns to the delay line input. Very high
values can lead to runaway feedback and produce a loud oscillation — watch your ears and
speakers if you decide to check out extreme feedback settings!
Grain Delay also has a dry/wet control, which can be routed to the vertical axis of the X-Y controller.
550

--- PAGE 551 ---
28.23 Hybrid Reverb
The Hybrid Reverb Effect.
Hybrid Reverb combines two different approaches to reverberation in one device, blending
convolution reverb with a number of digital reverb algorithms. Using multiple routing options and
parameters, you can create unique reverb sounds, or use Hybrid Reverb to generate drone-like
soundscapes or completely transform any source material.
In addition to providing a selection of impulse responses, Hybrid Reverb allows you to import any
audio file to use as an impulse response (also known as an IR), greatly increasing your sound design
opportunities. Dedicated controls can be employed to shape any chosen impulse response.
The algorithmic engine contains several reverb modes, each providing a different set of parameters
and sonic properties, ranging from clean and creamy to metallic and gong-like.
The convolution and algorithmic engines can be used independently, or combined together in series
or parallel, with their volume relationship being continuously adjustable. An EQ section further shapes
the reverb’s sound and can be selectively applied to the two reverb engines. An additional control
introduces degradation of the signal, emulating the behavior of older digital reverb units.
28.23. 1 Signal Flow
You can imagine signals being processed by Hybrid Reverb as flowing from the left side of the device
towards the right side, passing first through the input section, then into the reverb engines. The
relationship between the two reverb engines is affected by the routing section, after which the signal
passes through the EQ section, and then finally to the output.
The convolution reverb engine’s controls are yellow in color, while the algorithmic engine’s controls
are displayed in blue.
28.23.2 Input Section
Using the Send knob, you can choose the amount of gain applied to the signal that feeds the reverb.
Note that the dry signal is not affected and will still pass through the device.
55 1

--- PAGE 552 ---
Predelay controls the delay time before the onset of the first early reflection. This delays the
reverberation relative to the input signal. One’s impression of the size of a real room depends partly
on this delay; typical values for “natural” sounds range from 1ms to 25ms. You can choose either a
time-based or beat-synced predelay time using the Predelay Sync buttons.
Feedback sets the amount of the predelay’s output that is fed back to its input. Note that both time-
based and beat-based predelay times have independent feedback settings.
The main window of Hybrid Reverb has two tabs: Reverb and EQ. The Reverb tab contains all controls
related to both the convolution and algorithmic reverb engines. Starting with the Routing chooser in
the center, you’ll find four options:
Serial routes the output of the convolution engine into the algorithmic engine. While the
convolution reverb is always active in this mode, Blend controls the amount of convolution
reverb fed into the algorithmic reverb. A setting of 100/0 produces pure convolution reverb,
while 0/100 generates pure algorithmic reverb which has been fed by the convolution reverb’s
output.
Parallel uses both convolution and algorithmic reverb engines, but separates them from each
other. The Blend knob adjusts the level balance between the two different reverb engines, with
a setting of 100/0 generating pure convolution reverb and 0/100 producing pure algorithmic
reverb.
Algorithm uses only the algorithmic reverb engine.
Convolution uses only the convolution reverb engine.
Hybrid Reverb’s user interface changes dynamically, so that when a reverb engine is not in use, its
controls will appear grayed out.
The Blend knob blends between the output of the convolution and algorithm sections when Routing is
set to Serial or Parallel. Note that when either Algorithm or Convolution is selected in the Routing
chooser, the Blend knob will not have an effect.
28.23.3 Convolution Reverb Engine
Hybrid Reverb’s Convolution Reverb Section.
A convolution reverb uses recordings of actual spaces (called impulse responses) to create its effect.
This allows you to place your sounds in practically any space for which you have a recording. For a
more typical reverb sound, this can include some of the most famous halls and studios throughout the
• 
• 
• 
• 
552

--- PAGE 553 ---
world. With a more creative approach, you can use recordings of anything, from snare drums to
garbage cans, or even instrumental and vocal recordings!
Impulse responses can be chosen in the Convolution IR menu. The upper drop-down menu chooses
the category of impulse response, while the lower drop-down menu chooses a specific impulse
response from within that category. Backward and forward arrow buttons are provided for easy
browsing through impulse responses. These arrow buttons will automatically switch to the next
category when you reach the end of the current one, so you can continuously move through the
impulse responses using the arrows alone. The chosen impulse response’s waveform is then shown in
the main display, which changes based on the Attack, Decay, and Size settings (described below).
The various impulse response categories are: Early Reflections, Real Places, Chambers and Large
Rooms, Made for Drums, Halls, Plates, Springs, Bigger Spaces, Textures, and User.
To add your own impulse responses to the User category, drag and drop the IR audio file into Hybrid
Reverb’s convolution waveform display. If you add a file from a folder that contains other audio files,
all files will be added as impulse responses. Note: if you remove Hybrid Reverb from a track and add
it again, the previously added User samples will no longer be available in the User category.
However, you can drag and drop the samples into the waveform display again to repopulate the list.
The Attack, Decay, and Size parameters control the impulse response’s amplitude envelope. The
Attack parameter controls the attack time of the envelope, while the Decay parameter controls the
decay time of the envelope. The Size parameter adjusts the relative size of the impulse response.
28.23.4 Algorithmic Reverb Engine
Hybrid Reverb’s Algorithmic Reverb Section.
In comparison to the convolution engine, the algorithmic engine is based purely on digital delay lines,
and no samples are used.
To the right of the Blend knob you will find the controls for the algorithmic reverb engine. Different
parameters will be displayed depending on what you choose in the Algorithm chooser.
Five different algorithms are available: Dark Hall, Quartz, Shimmer, Tides and Prism. For all
algorithms, the Decay, Size, Delay and Freeze parameters are available.
553

--- PAGE 554 ---
Decay adjusts the approximate time required for the algorithm’s reverb tail to drop to 1/1000th (-60
dB) of its initial amplitude. Size controls the size of the virtual room. Delay sets an additional predelay
time in milliseconds for the algorithm section.
The Freeze controls consist of two buttons, Freeze and Freeze In. Freeze disables any input to the
reverb engine and sets the algorithm’s decay time to infinite, so that reverb output will sustain
endlessly. When enabled, Freeze In adds the input signal to the frozen reverberation, leading to a
build-up of reverberated sound.
Each algorithm and their unique parameters are described in further detail below.
28.23.4. 1 Dark Hall
The Dark Hall algorithm is a smooth and classic sounding algorithm suitable for most medium to long
sounding halls.
In addition to the shared parameters listed above, Dark Hall also provides the following:
Damping controls the amount of high-frequency filtering within the reverb algorithms. Higher
values result in darker reverberation sounds.
Mod controls the amount of movement within the algorithm’s reverb tail. Less modulation
produces less movement, and more modulation creates more movement with a chorusing effect,
while diminishing the effect of resonances.
Shape transforms the artificial space’s sonic characteristics from small and resonant to large
and diffused.
Bass X controls the crossover frequency of the low-end part of the reverb tail, which is scaled
using the Bass Mult control.
Bass Mult scales the decay time of the low-end of the reverb tail.
In Dark Hall mode, long decay times combined with extremely small Size values create metallic
gong-like resonances.
28.23.4.2 Quartz
The Quartz algorithm is a hall-like reverb with some audible echoes in the reverb’s tail. This reverb has
a very clear replication of the input in the early reflections and is well suited for voices, drums and
signals with clear transients, as well as making echoes.
In addition to the shared parameters listed above, Quartz also provides the following:
Damping controls the amount of high-frequency filtering within the reverb algorithms. Higher
values result in darker reverberation sounds.
Lo Damp controls the amount of low frequency filtering within the reverb algorithms. Higher
values result in brighter reverberation sounds.
Mod controls the amount of movement within the algorithm’s reverb tail. Less modulation
produces less movement, and more modulation creates more movement with a chorusing effect,
while diminishing the effect of resonances.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
554

--- PAGE 555 ---
Diffusion controls the density of the algorithm’s reverb tail. Low values produce sparser tails,
while higher values produce denser tails.
Distance controls the virtual distance of reflections. Lower values put them closer to the listener
and increase their density while higher values place them farther away and increase the time
between echoes.
28.23.4.3 Shimmer
The Shimmer reverb algorithm is made from densely stacked diffuse delays with a pitch shifter in the
feedback. Low diffusion values result in a pure delay, while high diffusion values result in a dense and
lush artificial reverb. The Shimmer effect crossfades the pitch-shifted signal into the feedback, resulting
in tails that climb or descend in frequency.
In addition to the shared parameters listed above, Shimmer also provides the following:
Damping controls the amount of high-frequency filtering within the reverb algorithms. Higher
values result in darker reverberation sounds.
Mod controls the amount of movement within the algorithm’s reverb tail. Less modulation
produces less movement, and more modulation creates more movement with a chorusing effect,
while diminishing the effect of resonances.
Pitch adjusts the degree of pitch-shifting applied to the feedback signal in semitones.
Diffusion controls the density of the algorithm’s reverb tail. Low values produce sparser tails,
while higher values produce denser tails. Turn this below 10% for dub-like delay effects. This is
very fun to use on drums!
Shimmer adjusts the intensity of the Shimmer effect. When set to 0%, no pitch shifting is applied;
the level of the pitched signal is progressively more present as the percentage is increased.
When used on melodic material, setting Shimmer to 100% produces interesting pitch
harmonizations.
In Shimmer mode, the Size knob adjusts the distance between individual echoes on percussive
material.
28.23.4.4 Tides
The Tides algorithm uses a smooth reverb while modulating the output’s spectrum with a multiband
filter, creating rippling frequency band effects.
In addition to the shared parameters listed above, Tides also provides the following:
Damping controls the amount of high-frequency filtering within the reverb algorithms. Higher
values result in darker reverberation sounds.
Wave morphs the filter modulation waveform from noise (0%) to sine (50%) to square (100%).
Tide adjusts the intensity of texture created by the modulation of the reverb tail.
Phase adjusts the amount of offset between the modulation waveforms for the left and right
channel. At 1 80°, the channels will be perfectly out of phase.
Rate sets the rate of the modulation oscillator in beat divisions with Triplet, 16th, and Dotted
note value variations.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
555

--- PAGE 556 ---
28.23.4.5 Prism
The Prism algorithm is a bright, unique and artificial-sounding diffuse reverb based on velvet
(spectrally flat) noise. This algorithm can easily be used as a “ghost” reverb, adding depth without
interfering with the source material. It is well suited for non-linear short decays on drums and transient
material but can be also used on more sustained sounds with longer decays to achieve a clean yet
digital sound.
In addition to the shared parameters listed above, Prism also provides the following:
Low Mult scales the decay time of the low-end of the reverb tail.
High Mult scales the decay time of the high-end of the reverb tail.
X over controls the crossover frequency between the low-frequency and high-frequency
portions of the reverb tail, which in turn adjusts the frequency content affected by the Low Mult
and High Mult parameters.
Tip: For a classic ‘80s-style gated snare reverb, use smaller Decay and Size values.
28.23.5 EQ Section
Hybrid Reverb’s EQ Section.
The EQ section of Hybrid Reverb is found in the second tab of the device’s display. You can quickly
activate or deactivate it by clicking on its toggle button in the tab.
By default, the EQ is placed after both reverb engines in the signal chain; however, by toggling the
Pre Algo button, you can place the EQ before the algorithmic reverb, regardless of which reverb
routing you have chosen.
Four bands of control are provided to further shape the reverb signal. The low and high bands can be
toggled between pass filters and shelving EQs. While in low-pass or high-pass mode, the filters
provide a range of slopes, from a gentle 6 dB/octave to a steep 96 dB/octave. The two middle peak
EQs can cover the entire frequency range and can be used for anything from wide-band boosting to
semi-narrow cuts.
• 
• 
• 
556

--- PAGE 557 ---
28.23.6 Output Section
Hybrid Reverb’s output section contains a final set of parameters to shape the device’s overall sound.
Stereo sets the stereo width of the wet signal. 0% yields a mono signal whereas values above 100%
create a widened stereo panorama.
The Vintage slider increasingly degrades Hybrid Reverb’s sounds by emulating lower sample rates
and bit-depths, as is common in vintage digital reverberation devices. Four presets can be used to
radically alter the overall sound: Subtle, Old, Older, and Extreme.
Bass Mono converts frequencies lower than 1 80 Hz of Hybrid Reverb’s output signal to mono, which
helps to make bass frequencies sound tighter.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100%
when using Hybrid Reverb in a return track.
28.24 Limiter
The Limiter Effect.
The Limiter effect is a mastering-quality dynamic range processor that ensures that the output does not
exceed a specified level. Limiter is ideal for use on the Main track, to prevent clipping in digital-to-
analog converters. A limiter is essentially a compressor with an infinite ratio. For more information
about compression theory, refer to the Compressor section.
557

--- PAGE 558 ---
Limiter’s display contains the Ceiling control and the Gain Reduction meter. The Ceiling control sets the
absolute maximum level that Limiter will output. If your incoming signal level has no peaks that are
higher than the ceiling, no limiting will be applied by the device.
The Gain Reduction meter shows the amount of gain reduction being applied when the signal reaches
the ceiling or threshold.
The Link control defines how much of the gain reduction applied by Limiter is shared across its two
channels. These can be the left/right channels or the mid/side channels, depending on which Routing
Mode is selected. When set to 100%, limiting is applied to both channels whenever either requires
compression, ensuring a stable stereo image. When set to 0%, the channels are processed
independently, with different gain reduction applied to each channel. This can be useful when
working with signals where the left and right channels are separate, or to achieve creative effects,
such as a “wobble” in the stereo image.
You can use the Input Gain knob to the left of the display to boost or attenuate the incoming signal
level before limiting is applied to it.
Switching on the Maximize toggle below the Input Gain knob changes the Ceiling control to
Threshold, which allows you to adjust the signal’s dynamic range and loudness with a single control.
Lowering the Threshold amplifies the limiter stage output by the inverse of the Threshold value. Note
that the Input Gain knob becomes the Output control when Maximize is on, and sets the target output
level for the device.
The Release knob adjusts how long it takes for the device to stop applying limiting after the signal falls
below the ceiling or threshold. Fast release times make the output sound louder and punchier, while
slow release times add smoothness, though can also reduce the dynamic range. The Gain Reduction
meter helps to visualize the effect of the Release control: at faster release times you will see the meter
return to zero more quickly, while at slower release times the meter recovers more gradually, and
Limiter maintains compression for a longer time.
You can use the Auto toggle beneath the Release knob to activate auto-release. When on, Limiter
analyzes incoming audio and continuously updates its release time based on the signal’s
characteristics. Note that when auto-release is enabled, the Release control is deactivated.
The Lookahead control to the right of the display allows you to adjust the setting that determines how
quickly Limiter will respond to peaks that require compression. The lookahead time can be set to 1.5,
3, or 6 milliseconds. Shorter lookahead times allow for more compression but can increase distortion,
especially when applied to bass sounds. As the lookahead time affects Limiter’s attack time, longer
lookahead values are useful for catching very fast peaks. Note that lookahead introduces latency: the
longer the lookahead time, the higher the latency.
The Ceiling Mode toggles let you choose between three ceiling modes: Standard, Soft Clip, and True
Peak. Standard is the device’s default mode. Soft Clip introduces soft clipping when signals approach
the device’s ceiling level, which can add subtle color and punch to transients. When Soft Clip is on, an
LED appears above the mode toggles, and flashes to indicate that the signal is clipping. Finally, the
True Peak mode prevents inter-sample peaks.
558

--- PAGE 559 ---
You can use the Routing Mode toggles to determine how Limiter treats peaks that occur on only one
side of the stereo signal. In L/R mode, the left and right channels of the signal are compressed
independently. This allows the device to apply more compression, but with some distortion of the
stereo image. In M/S mode, Limiter encodes the signal to mid/side before the limiting stage, then
decodes it to stereo at the output stage. This can be useful for preserving the signal’s stereo image, but
results in higher latency.
Note that adding any further processing effects after Limiter may add gain. To ensure that your final
output will never clip, place Limiter as the last device in the Main track’s device chain and keep the
Main track’s volume below 0 dB.
28.25 Looper
The Looper Effect.
Looper is an audio effect based on classic real-time looping devices. It allows you to record and loop
audio, creating endless overdubs that are synced to your Set. If the Set is not playing, Looper can
analyze incoming audio and set Live’s tempo to match it. You can also predefine a loop length before
recording and Live’s tempo will adjust so that your loop fits into the specified number of bars.
Furthermore, audio can be imported to Looper to create a background for newly overdubbed
material, or exported from Looper as a new clip.
The top half of Looper’s interface is a large display area optimized for easy readability during
performance. During recording, the entire display area turns red. After recording, the display shows
the current position in the loop and the total loop length in bars and beats.
Looper’s transport buttons work in a similar way to other transport controls in Live. The Record button
records incoming audio until another button is pressed. This overwrites any audio currently stored in
Looper. Overdub continues to add additional layers of incoming audio that are the length of the
559

--- PAGE 560 ---
originally recorded material. The Play button plays back the current state of Looper’s buffer without
recording any new material. The Stop button stops playback.
The behavior of the transport controls changes depending on whether or not Live’s playback is
running. With the transport running, Looper behaves like a clip, and is subject to launch quantization
as determined by the Quantization chooser. When Live’s playback is stopped, Looper’s transport
engages immediately, regardless of the Quantization setting.
The Clear button erases Looper’s buffer. If you press Clear in Overdub mode while the transport is
running, the contents of the buffer are cleared but the tempo and length are maintained. Pressing
Clear in any other mode resets the tempo and length.
The Undo button erases everything that you’ve overdubbed since the last time Overdub was enabled.
Your original recording, and anything that was overdubbed in a previous pass, is preserved. After
pressing Undo, the button changes to Redo, which replaces the material removed by the last undo.
The large button below the transport controls is the Multi-Purpose Transport Button. As with the normal
transport buttons, this button’s behavior changes depending on Looper’s current playback state, and
whether or not material has already been recorded. If the buffer is empty, a single click starts
recording. If Looper is recording, overdubbing or stopped, a single click switches to play mode.
During playback, a click switches to overdub mode, allowing you to toggle back and forth between
overdub and playback via additional single clicks.
Quickly pressing the button twice stops Looper, from either play or overdub mode. Clicking and
holding the button for two seconds while in play mode activates Undo or Redo. Pressing and holding
for two seconds while stopped clears Looper’s buffer.
Diagram of Looper’s Multi-Purpose Transport Button Behavior.
560

--- PAGE 561 ---
Looper’s Multi-Purpose Transport Button is optimized for use with a MIDI footswitch. To assign a
footswitch, enter MIDI Map Mode, click the button and then press your attached footswitch. Then exit
MIDI Map Mode.
The Tempo Control chooser affects how Looper determines the tempo of recorded material:
None: Looper’s internal tempo is independent of Live’s global tempo.
Follow song tempo: The speed of Looper’s playback will be adjusted so that the recorded
material plays back at Live’s global tempo.
Set & Follow song tempo: Live’s global tempo will be adjusted to match the tempo of material
recorded into Looper. Any subsequent changes to Live’s global tempo will adjust the speed of
Looper’s playback so that the recorded material plays back at the new global tempo.
The Record Length chooser is used to set the length of recorded material. Its behavior changes
depending on whether or not Live’s global transport is running and, depending on the setting of the
Tempo Control chooser, can set Live’s global tempo:
Song running: If Looper’s Record Length chooser is set to the default ”x bars,” Looper will
record until you press another transport button. If you specify a fixed number of bars to record
by selecting another option in the chooser, Looper will record for the specified time and then
switch to Play or Overdub, as determined by the button next to this chooser.
Song not running: If Looper’s Record Length chooser is set to the default ”x bars,” Looper will
make a guess about the tempo of the material you’ve recorded as soon as you press Overdub,
Play or Stop. But this might result in a tempo that’s twice or half as fast as you’d like. If you first
specify a fixed number of bars, Looper’s tempo will adjust so that your recording fits into this
time.
The Song Control chooser determines how Looper’s transport controls will affect Live’s global
transport:
None means that Looper’s transport controls have no effect on Live’s global transport.
Start Song will start Live’s global transport whenever Looper enters Play or Overdub mode.
Looper’s Stop button has no effect on the global transport.
Start & Stop Song locks Live’s global transport to Looper’s transport controls. Entering Play or
Overdub mode will start Live’s transport, while pressing Looper’s Stop button will stop Live’s
transport.
Starting playback of Live’s transport via Looper will automatically adjust the playback position of any
apps that are connected via Ableton Link. This ensures that those apps remain tempo synced, and also
at the correct position in the musical phrase.
The ”×2” button doubles the length of Looper’s recording buffer. Any material that you’ve already
recorded will simply be duplicated. This allows you to, for example, record a series of one-bar ideas,
and then overlay a series of two-bar ideas. The length and tempo of Looper’s buffer is shown in the
display area.
Similarly, the ”÷2” button cuts the length of the current buffer in half. The material in the currently
playing half is kept, while the other half is discarded.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
56 1

--- PAGE 562 ---
The ”Drag me!” area in the display allows you to export Looper’s buffer as a new audio file. You can
drag and drop to the browser or directly to a track, creating a new clip. The newly created clip’s
Warp Mode will be set to Re-Pitch by default. You can also drag audio files to the ”Drag me!” area,
which will replace the contents of Looper’s buffer. You can then use this material as a bed for further
overdubs, for example.
The Speed knob adjusts Looper’s playback speed (and thus pitch). The up and down arrow buttons to
the left are shortcuts to raise or lower the pitch by octaves (thus doubling or halving the playback
speed). These buttons are subject to the Quantization chooser setting.
Enabling the Reverse button plays the previously recorded material backwards. Any material that you
overdub after enabling Reverse will be played forward. Note that disabling Reverse will then swap
this behavior; the original material will play forward again, while the material that was overdubbed
while Reverse was enabled will play backwards. Engaging the Reverse button is subject to the
Quantization chooser setting.
Feedback sets the amount of previously recorded signal that is fed back into Looper when
overdubbing. When set to 100%, the previously recorded material will never decrease in volume.
When set to 50%, it will be half as loud with each repetition. Any changes to the Feedback amount
won’t take effect until the next repetition. Note that Feedback has no effect in Play mode; each
repetition will be at the same volume.
The Input -> Output chooser provides four options for monitoring Looper’s input:
Always allows the input signal to be heard regardless of Looper’s playing or recording state.
You’ll typically want to choose Always when using Looper as an effect in a single track.
Never means that the input signal will never be heard. You’ll typically want to choose Never
when using Looper as an effect in a return track, where it may be fed by send levels from a
variety of other tracks.
Rec/OVR means that the input is only audible when recording or overdubbing, but not when
Looper is in Play mode or stopped. This is useful for situations in which you are feeding audio to
multiple tracks, each containing its own Looper. If each of these Loopers is controlled with its
own foot pedal, you can switch the recording and playback state while playing an instrument,
without having to worry about monitor settings.
Rec/OVR/Stop allows the input signal to be heard except when Looper is in play mode. This is
similar to Beat Repeat’s Insert mode, and can be used to record material that can suddenly
interrupt your live playing.
28.25. 1 Feedback Routing
Looper can be used as both a source and a target for internal routing to other tracks. This allows you
to, for example, create Looper overdubs that continually feed back through another track’s devices. To
set this up:
Insert Looper on a track.
Record at least one pass of material into Looper.
Create another audio track.
• 
• 
• 
• 
1. 
2. 
3. 
562

--- PAGE 563 ---
In the new track’s top Audio From and Audio To choosers, select the track containing the
Looper.
In the new track’s bottom Audio From and Audio To choosers, select ”Insert-Looper.”
Switch this track’s Monitoring to ”In.”
Add additional effects devices to the device chain of the new track.
Put Looper into Overdub mode.
Looper’s output will now be routed through the other track’s device chain and then back into itself,
creating increasingly processed overdub layers with each pass.
28.26 Multiband Dynamics
The Multiband Dynamics Effect.
The Multiband Dynamics device is a flexible tool for modifying the dynamic range of audio material.
Designed primarily as a mastering processor, Multiband Dynamics allows for upward and downward
compression and expansion of up to three independent frequency bands, with adjustable crossover
points and envelope controls for each band. Each frequency range has both an upper and lower
threshold, allowing for two types of dynamics processing to be used simultaneously per band.
28.26. 1 Dynamics Processing Theory
To understand how to use the Multiband Dynamics device, it helps to understand the four different
methods of manipulating dynamics.
When we use the term “compression,” we’re typically talking about lowering the level of signals that
exceed a threshold. This is how Live’s Compressor works, and is more accurately called downward
compression because it pushes loud signals down, thus reducing the dynamic range. But it is also
possible to reduce a signal’s dynamic range by raising the levels of signals that are below a threshold.
This much-less-common form of compression is called upward compression. As you can see from this
diagram, employing either type of compression results in a signal with a smaller dynamic range than
the original.
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
563

--- PAGE 564 ---
Downward and Upward Compression.
The opposite of compression is expansion. A typical expander lowers the levels of signals that are
below a threshold. This is how Live’s Gate works, and is more accurately called downward expansion
because it pushes quiet signals down, thus increasing the dynamic range. It is also possible to increase
a signal’s dynamic range by raising the levels of signals that are above a threshold. Like upward
compression, this technique is known as upward expansion and is much less common. This diagram
shows that either type of expansion results in a signal with a larger dynamic range.
Downward and Upward Expansion.
To summarize:
Downward compression (common): make loud signals quieter
Upward compression (uncommon): make quiet signals louder
Downward expansion (common): make quiet signals quieter
Upward expansion (uncommon): make loud signals louder
The Multiband Dynamics device allows for all of these types of processing. In fact, because the device
allows for incoming audio to be divided into three frequency bands, and each band has both an
• 
• 
• 
• 
564

--- PAGE 565 ---
upper and lower threshold, a single instance of Multiband Dynamics can provide six types of
dynamics processing simultaneously.
28.26.2 Interface and Controls
The High and Low buttons toggle the high and low bands on or off. With both bands off, the device
functions as a single-band effect. In this case, only the Mid controls affect the incoming signal. The
frequency sliders below the High and Low buttons adjust the crossovers that define the frequency
ranges for each band. If the low frequency is set to 500 Hz and the high frequency is set to 2000 Hz,
then the low band goes from 0 Hz to 500 Hz, the mid band from 500 Hz to 2000 Hz and the high
band from 2000 Hz up to whatever your soundcard or sample rate supports.
Each band has activator and solo buttons. With the activator button disabled for a given band, its
compression/expansion and gain controls are bypassed. Soloing a band mutes the others. The Input
knobs boost or attenuate the level of each band before it undergoes dynamics processing, while the
Output knobs to the right of the display adjust the levels of the bands after processing.
The display area provides a way of both visualizing your dynamics processing and adjusting the
relevant compression and expansion behavior. For each band, the output level is represented by large
bars, while the input level before processing is represented by small bars. With no processing applied,
the input meters will be aligned with the top of the output meters. The scaling along the bottom of the
display shows dB. As you adjust the gain or dynamics processing for a band, you can see how its
output changes in comparison to its input.
As you move your mouse over the display, the cursor will change to a bracket as it passes over the
edges of the blocks on the left or right side. These blocks represent the signal levels under the Below
and over the Above thresholds, respectively. Dragging left or right on the edges of these blocks
adjusts the threshold level. Holding down Ctrl (Win) / Cmd (Mac) while dragging a threshold
will adjust the same threshold for all bands. Hold down Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) to
simultaneously adjust the Above and Below thresholds for a single band. Holding down Shift
while dragging left or right allows you to adjust the threshold of a single band at a finer resolution.
As you mouse over the middle of the block, the cursor will change to an up-down arrow. Click and
drag up or down to make the signal within the selected volume range louder or quieter. Holding
down Ctrl (Win) / Cmd (Mac) while dragging up or down will adjust the volume of the same
block for all bands. Hold down Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) to simultaneously adjust the Above
and Below volumes for a single band. Holding down Shift while dragging up or down allows you
to adjust the volume of a single band at a finer resolution. Double-clicking within the region resets the
volume to its default.
In technical terms, lowering the volume in the block above the Above threshold applies downward
compression, while raising it applies upward expansion. Likewise, lowering the volume in the block
below the Below threshold applies downward expansion, while raising it applies upward
compression. In all cases, you are adjusting the ratio of the compressor or expander.
The thresholds and ratios of all bands can also be adjusted via the column to the right of the display.
The ”T,” ”B” and ” A” buttons at the bottom right of the display area toggle between displaying the
565

--- PAGE 566 ---
Time (attack and release), Below (threshold and ratio) and Above (threshold and ratio) for each
band.
For the Above thresholds, Attack defines how long it takes to reach maximum compression or
expansion once a signal exceeds the threshold, while Release sets how long it takes for the device to
return to normal operation after the signal falls below the threshold.
For the Below thresholds, Attack defines how long it takes to reach maximum compression or
expansion once a signal drops below the threshold, while Release sets how long it takes for the
device to return to normal operation after the signal goes above the threshold.
With Soft Knee enabled, compression or expansion begins gradually as the threshold is approached.
The RMS/Peak switch also affects how quickly Multiband Dynamics responds to level changes. With
Peak selected, the device reacts to short peaks within a signal. RMS mode causes it to be less sensitive
to very short peaks and to begin processing only when the incoming level has crossed the threshold
for a slightly longer time.
The global Output knob adjusts the overall output gain of the device.
The Time control scales the durations of all of the Attack and Release controls. This allows you to
maintain the same relative envelope times, but make them all faster or slower by the same amount.
The Amount knob adjusts the intensity of the compression or expansion applied to all bands. At 0%,
each compressor/expander has an effective ratio of 1, meaning that it has no effect on the signal.
28.26.3 Sidechain Parameters
The Multiband Dynamics Device With Sidechain Section.
Normally, the signal being processed and the input source that triggers the device are the same
signal. But by using sidechaining, it is possible to apply dynamics processing to a signal based on the
level of another signal or a specific frequency component. To access the Sidechain parameters, unfold
the Multiband Dynamics window by toggling the  button in its title bar.
Enabling the Sidechain button allows you to select any of Live’s internal routing points from the
choosers below. This causes the selected source to act as the device’s trigger, instead of the signal that
is actually being processed.
566

--- PAGE 567 ---
The Gain knob adjusts the level of the external sidechain’s input, while the Dry/Wet knob allows you
to use a combination of sidechain and original signal as the trigger. With Dry/Wet at 100%, the
device is triggered entirely by the sidechain source. At 0%, the sidechain is effectively bypassed. Note
that increasing the gain does not increase the volume of the source signal in the mix. The sidechain
audio is only a trigger for the device and is never actually heard.
The headphones button allows you to listen to only the sidechain input, bypassing the device’s output.
Since the sidechain audio isn’t fed to the output, and is only a trigger for the device, this temporary
listening option can make it much easier to set sidechain parameters and hear what’s actually making
the device work.
28.26.4 Multiband Dynamics Tips
Multiband Dynamics is a feature-rich and powerful device, capable of up to six independent types of
simultaneous processing. Because of this, getting started can be a bit intimidating. Here are some
real-world applications to give you some ideas.
28.26.4. 1 Basic Multiband Compression
By using only the upper thresholds, Multiband Dynamics can be used as a traditional ”downward”
compressor. Adjust the crossover points to suit your audio material, then apply downward
compression (by dragging down in the upper blocks in the display or by setting the numerical ratios to
values greater than 1.)
28.26.4.2 De-essing
To remove ”harshness” caused by overly loud high frequency content, try enabling only the upper
band and setting its crossover frequency to around 5 kHz. Then gradually adjust the threshold and
ratio to apply subtle downward compression. It may help to solo the band to more easily hear the
results of your adjustments. Generally, de-essing works best with fairly fast attack and release times.
28.26.4.3 Uncompression
Mastering engineers are often asked to perform miracles, like adding punch and energy to a mix that
has already been heavily compressed, and thus has almost no remaining transients. Most of the time,
these mixes have also been heavily maximized, meaning that they also have no remaining headroom.
Luckily, upward expansion can sometimes help add life back to such overly squashed material. To do
this:
Turn down the Input knob to provide some additional headroom.
Adjust the Above thresholds for the bands so that they’re below the highest peaks.
Add a small amount of upward expansion to each band. Be careful — excessive upward
expansion can make transients very loud.
1. 
2. 
3. 
567

--- PAGE 568 ---
Carefully adjust the attack and release times for each band. Note that, unlike in typical
downward compression, very fast attack times will increase the impact of transients, while
slower times result in a more muffled sound.
Note: Adding a maximizer or limiter to boost gain after you’ve returned some peaks to your material
may simply destroy them again.
28.27 Overdrive
The Overdrive Effect.
Overdrive is a distortion effect that pays homage to some classic pedal devices commonly used by
guitarists. Unlike many distortion units, it can be driven extremely hard without sacrificing dynamic
range.
The distortion stage is preceded by a band-pass filter that can be controlled with an X-Y controller. To
define the filter bandwidth, click and drag on the vertical axis. To set the position of the frequency
band, click and drag on the horizontal axis. These parameters can also be set via the slider boxes
below the X-Y display.
The Drive control sets the amount of distortion. Note that 0% does not mean zero distortion!
Tone acts as a post-distortion EQ control. At higher values, the signal has more high-frequency
content.
4. 
568

--- PAGE 569 ---
The Dynamics slider allows you to adjust how much compression is applied as the distortion is
increased. At low settings, higher distortion amounts result in an increase in internal compression and
make-up gain. At higher settings, less compression is applied.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100
percent if using Overdrive in a return track.
28.28 Pedal
The Pedal Effect.
Pedal is a guitar distortion effect. In combination with Live’s Tuner, Amp and Cabinet effects, Pedal is
great for processing guitar sounds. Pedal can also be used in less conventional settings, such as a
standalone effect on vocals, synths or drums.
The Gain control adjusts the amount of distortion applied to the dry signal. Note that 0% does not
mean zero distortion. It is recommended to dial the Gain back to 0% and slowly increase it until you
get the desired output level. When placed in front of Pedal in a device chain, Utility’s Gain parameter
can be used to lower the signal even further.
The global Output knob adjusts the overall output gain of the device.
You can choose between three different Pedal Types, each inspired by distortion pedals with their own
distinct sonic characteristics:
Overdrive: warm and smooth
• 
569

--- PAGE 570 ---
Distortion: tight and aggressive
Fuzz: unstable, with a “broken amp” sound
Pedal has a three-band EQ that adjusts the timbre of the sound after the distortion is applied. The EQ
is adaptive, which means that the amount of resonance (or “Q”) increases as the amount of EQ boost
increases.
The Bass control is a peak EQ, with a center frequency of 100 Hz. This is useful for boosting the
“punch” in bass or drum sounds, or attenuating low frequencies of guitars.
The Mid control is a three-way switchable boosting EQ. The Mid Frequency switch sets the center
frequency and range of the Mid control. The center frequency is the middle of the frequency range
that the Mid control operates upon. The frequency range around this center value is narrower in the
lowest switch setting and wider in the higher setting. This is common in guitar pedals where it is normal
to make tight cuts and boosts at low frequencies, and wider cuts and boosts at high frequencies.
The center frequencies for the switch settings are:
Lowest setting, positioned on the left side: 500 Hz
Middle setting, positioned in the center: 1 kHz
Highest setting, positioned on the right side: 2 kHz
The Treble control is a shelving EQ, with a cutoff frequency of 3.3 kHz. This is useful for removing
harsh high frequencies (or boosting them, if that’s your cup of tea!).
Tip: For a more fine-grained EQ post-distortion, simply leave these controls in their neutral position
and instead use another EQ, such as EQ Eight.
The Sub switch toggles a low shelf filter that boosts frequencies below 250 Hz. You can use this in
conjunction with the Bass control by turning Sub on and setting the Bass to -100%, or turning Sub off
and setting the Bass to 100%.
The Dry/Wet slider adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals.
Aliasing can be reduced by enabling Hi-Quality mode, which can be accessed via the device title
bar’s context menu. This improves the sound quality, particularly with high frequency signals, but there
is a slight increase in CPU usage.
28.28. 1 Pedal Tips
28.28. 1. 1 Positioning Pedal in the Device Chain
The incoming signal will have an impact on how the distortion will respond. For example, adding a
Compressor before Pedal in the device chain will give a more balanced end result. On the other
hand, adding an EQ or filter with high gain and resonance settings before Pedal can yield a
screaming distortion effect.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
570

--- PAGE 571 ---
28.28. 1.2 Techno Kick
Choose a suitable kick with a long decay (e.g., Kit-Core 909, with decay turned up). Then, choose the
Distort pedal, activate the Sub switch, and dial in the Gain to your taste.
For added “whack”, move the Mid Frequency switch to the right-most position and increase the Mid
control. For more “thump”, you can increase the Bass control.
To reduce the “air”, decrease the Treble control.
28.28. 1.3 Drum Group Fizzle
To add “fizzle” to a drum group, choose the Fuzz pedal, increase the Gain to 50% and make sure the
Sub switch is disabled.
Reduce the Bass and Mid controls to -100%, and adjust the Mid Frequency Switch to taste. Increase
the Treble to 100%.
Set the Output to -20dB. Then, turn the Dry/Wet slider down to 0% and slowly increase it until the
drums are fizzling to your taste.
28.28. 1.4 Broken Speaker
Select the Fuzz pedal, and make sure the Sub switch is disabled. Turn down the Bass control
completely, and set the Treble to 25%.
Set the Mid control 100% and move the Mid Frequency switch to right-most position. Finally, set the
Gain control to 100%.
28.28. 1.5 Sub Warmer
To add upper harmonics and warmth to a simple sub bass, choose the OD pedal, turn on the Sub
switch and turn up the Bass control. Then, slowly increase the Gain until the desired effect is reached.
You can then cut or boost the mid frequencies using the Mid control.
57 1

--- PAGE 572 ---
28.29 Phaser-Flanger
The Phaser-Flanger Effect.
Phaser-Flanger combines the functionalities of flanger and phaser effects into one device with
separate modes, and offers an additional Doubler mode. All modes can be used to create lush,
expressive sounds with a wide variety of tools and detailed options. Two LFOs and an envelope
follower provide plenty of modulation possibilities.
You can choose between the three modes in the display:
Phaser, with its wide range of frequency and modulation ranges, creates wandering notch
filters by feeding a phase-shifted version of the input signal back into the input. The phase
shifting is achieved using modulated all-pass filters and has a lush sound.
Flanger creates a continuously changing comb filter effect by adding a time-modulated
delayed signal with feedback to the input.
Doubler creates the effect of doubled tracks (multiple stacked versions of similar recording
takes) by adding time-modulated delayed signals to the input.
The display contains a visualization and the mode selector buttons. The visualization presents different
information depending on the mode you choose and the LFO Stereo Mode’s settings (described in
more detail below).
In Phaser mode, the visualization shows the number of notches and their spectral positions.
Phaser’s parameters can be adjusted in the lower portion of the display.
• 
• 
• 
572

--- PAGE 573 ---
Notches increases or decreases the number of all-pass filters being used. Center chooses the center
frequency of the notches. Spread increases or decreases the distance between the notches by
adjusting the Q factor of the all-pass filters. Blend mixes the modulation routing between Center
Frequency and Spread, with Center Frequency at 0.0 and Spread at 1.0.
In Flanger mode, the visualization shows how the modulation signal is affecting the delay time, with
the left-most position equaling the value chosen in the Time parameter. As the visualization moves to
the right, the delay time decreases; as it moves to the left, it increases. Time adjusts the delay time of
the Flanger delay lines.
In Doubler mode, the visualization acts differently than in Flanger mode. Modulation in Doubler mode
is bipolar, meaning that, as the visualization moves to the right, the delay time increases; as it moves to
the left, it decreases. Time adjusts the delay time of the Doubler delay lines.
For finer control over the sound, you can unfold the device by toggling the  button in Phaser-
Flanger’s title bar to reveal further options for the main LFO, as well as a second LFO, an envelope
follower and a Safe Bass high-pass filter. Also shown is a visualization for the main LFO, in which its
rate, waveform and the phase relationships of the stereo channels are shown.
The Phaser-Flanger Effect’s Unfolded View.
The main LFO’s speed is controlled by the Freq/Rate parameter, and can be either tempo-synced or
free-running. Use the Modulation Sync buttons to the left of the dial to switch between Frequency and
Sync Rate. When set to Hz, the corresponding Freq dial controls the LFO rate in Hertz; otherwise, the
Rate dial will sync the LFO with the song tempo.
Multiple waveforms for the main LFO are available and can be found in the LFO Waveform chooser.
These include Sine, Triangle (default), Saw Up, Saw Down, Rectangle, Random, and Random S&H
(Sample and Hold). Also included are Triangle Analog, Triangle 8, Triangle 16, which are described
below:
Triangle Analog is a low-pass filtered rectangular waveform which changes shape and
amplitude drastically for different LFO rates.
Triangle 8 divides a period of a normal triangular wave into eight discrete steps.
Triangle 16 divides a period of a normal triangular wave into 16 discrete steps.
• 
• 
• 
573

--- PAGE 574 ---
The LFO Stereo Mode button switches between Phase and Spin modes, both of which allow
modulation of each stereo channel independently.
When Phase is chosen, adjusting the Phase value will change the phase relationship between the left
and right channels. At 1 80°, the phase of the left and right channels are completely inverted. This can
be seen in the LFOs visualization.
When Spin is chosen, adjusting the Spin value detunes the two LFO rates relative to each other. This
can be seen in the main display’s visualization.
Duty Cycle will change the time scale of the waveform’s period, compressing it towards either the front
of the cycle (100%) or the back of the cycle (-100%). At 0%, the time scale of the period is spread
equally across the entire cycle, leaving the waveform unaffected. This is similar to how Pulse Width
affects rectangular waveforms, and its effects can be seen in the waveform view of the main LFO. This
parameter doesn’t affect the noise-based Random and Random S&H modulation waveforms.
The second LFO always has a triangular waveform, and can be controlled using the LFO2 Mix and
LFO2 Freq/Rate parameters.
LFO2 Mix sets the amount of the LFO2 that is mixed with the main LFO. At 0%, only the main LFO is
active; at 100% only LFO2 is active.
The second LFO’s speed can be set as either free-running or tempo-synced by using the Modulation
Sync 2 toggle buttons. When free-running, the sync frequencies are shown in Hertz and can be
adjusted using the LFO2 Freq parameter. When tempo-synced, beat divisions are shown instead and
can be set using the LFO2 Rate parameter.
Global parameters available include Amount, Feedback, Output, Warmth and Dry/Wet. The
additional envelope follower and Safe Bass high-pass filter are accessible when the device is
unfolded.
Amount adjusts the amount of delay modulation that is applied to incoming signals and affects both
the main LFO and LFO2.
Feedback sets the amount of each channel’s output that is fed back to its input. Increasing this sounds
more extreme and tends to create a strong comb filtering effect, amplifying some frequencies and
attenuating others. In Doubler Mode, it will also create audible delays if playback is stopped. The
feedback signal can be inverted using the Ø button, which results in a “hollow” sound when
combined with high feedback values.
Caution: high feedback values in combination with certain settings can cause quick increases in
volume levels. Be sure to protect your ears and equipment!
Below the main LFO you will find an envelope follower. An envelope follower uses the amplitude from
an incoming audio signal and translates it to a modulation source.
To use the envelope follower, activate the Env Fol button and set the Envelope Amount value to a
value other than zero. Envelope Amount adjusts the intensity of the modulation caused by the
envelope follower. Negative values invert the phase of the envelope.
57 4

--- PAGE 575 ---
Attack and Release adjust the attack and release portions of the envelope follower’s envelope.
Shorter Attack times cause the envelope follower to act more quickly, while longer times delay its
onset. Shorter Release times cause the envelope follower to stop its effect faster than longer Release
times.
Safe Bass is a high-pass filter, effectively reducing the effect on signal components below the
specified frequency. The applicable range is from 5 Hz to 3000 Hz. This can make mixing certain
bass-heavy material easier.
Output sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal. The Warmth control adds slight
distortion and filtering for a warmer sound. The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the
processed and dry signals. Set it to 100% when using Phaser-Flanger in a return track.
28.30 Redux
The Redux Effect.
The Redux effect has a variety of parameters for creating a wide range of jagged and edgy sounds.
You can radically mangle any source material, with effects ranging from harsh distortion and digital
aliasing artifacts to warm, fat 8-bit grit. Extra noise and stereo width can be added to the
downsampling process, while filtering further transforms the sound. The quantizer’s amplitude curve
can also be changed to allow both subtle and drastic bitcrushing.
Redux makes use of two different digital signal manipulation techniques: downsampling and bit
reduction.
575

--- PAGE 576 ---
28.30. 1 Downsampling
The downsampling controls are available on the left side of the device. Using Redux’s downsampler
without any filters engaged introduces inharmonic frequency content into the spectrum. The frequency
range of the added content is dependent upon the relationship between the frequency content of the
material and the sample rate chosen in the device.
Rate sets the sample rate to which the signal is degraded. Lower values result in increased imaging
and more inharmonic tones.
Jitter adds noise to the downsampler’s clock signal, which introduces randomness to the
downsampling process. This results in a noisier sound, as well as increased stereo width.
The Filter section has both a Pre and a Post setting. Enabling the Pre button engages a filter before
downsampling, which reduces the bandwidth of the signal processed by downsampling. When Jitter
is in use, it also reduces the stereo width of the signal.
The Post button engages a low-pass filter after the downsampling process, which reduces imaging.
The Post filter frequency can be adjusted using the Post-Filter Octave slider. The number shown
represents the number of octaves above or below half of the frequency shown in the Rate parameter.
28.30.2 Bit Reduction
The bit reduction controls are available on the right side of the device. Bit reduction decreases the
number of bits used to represent the digital signal, reducing dynamic range while adding distortion
and noise. At extreme settings, all original dynamics are lost and sounds are reduced to jagged
square waves.
The Bits control reduces the number of bits being used. The value shown represents the number of bits
used to encode the output signal. Reducing this value increases noise and distortion while reducing
dynamic range.
Shape varies the shape of the quantizer’s characteristic curve. Higher values produce a finer
resolution for smaller amplitudes, meaning that subtle signal components will be less affected than
louder ones. The total amount of distortion produced with different Shape settings will depend upon
the dynamic range of the input signal.
Enabling the DC Shift button applies an amplitude offset before the quantization process. This
significantly changes the sound of the quantization distortion, especially when Bits is set to lower
values, increasing volume and adding crunch!
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to 100%
when using Redux in a return track.
576

--- PAGE 577 ---
28.3 1 Resonators
The Resonators Effect.
This device consists of five parallel resonators that superimpose a tonal character on the input source.
It can produce sounds resembling anything from plucked strings to vocoder-like effects. The resonators
are tuned in semitones, providing a musical way of adjusting them. The first resonator defines the root
pitch and the four others are tuned relative to this pitch in musical intervals.
The input signal passes first through a filter, and then into the resonators. There are four input filter
types to select from: low-pass, band-pass, high-pass and notch. The input filter frequency can be
adjusted with the Frequency parameter.
The first resonator is fed with both the left and right input channels, while the second and fourth
resonators are dedicated to the left channel, and the third and fifth to the right channel.
The Note parameter defines the root pitch of all the resonators ranging from C-1 to C5. It can also be
detuned in cents using the Fine parameter. The Decay parameter lets you adjust the amount of time it
takes for the resonators to be silent after getting an input signal. The longer the decay time, the more
tonal the result will be, similar to the behavior of an undamped piano string. As with a real string, the
decay time depends on the pitch, so low notes will last longer than higher ones. The Const switch
holds the decay time constant regardless of the actual pitch.
Resonators provides two different resonation modes. Mode A provides a more realistic sounding
resonation, while Mode B offers an effect that is especially interesting when Resonator I’s Note
parameter is set to lower pitches.
The brightness of the resulting sound can be adjusted using the Color control.
All of the resonators have an On/Off switch and a Gain control. A resonator that is turned off does
not need CPU. Turning off the first resonator does not affect the other ones.
577

--- PAGE 578 ---
Resonators II through V follow the Note parameter defined in Resonator I, but they can each be
individually transposed +/- 24 semitones using the Pitch controls and detuned in cents using the
Detune controls.
The output section features the obligatory Dry/Wet control and a Width parameter that affects only
the wet signal and blends the left and right outputs of Resonators II-V into a mono signal if set to zero.
28.32 Reverb
The Reverb Effect.
Reverb is an audio effect that simulates the acoustic properties of audio as it echoes throughout a
physical space.
In the real world, reverberation exists as a product of sound waves that reflect off of rigid surfaces in
an environment and the subsequent tonal shaping of these waves by absorbent materials within their
trajectory. In a digital context, however, this phenomenon is approximated with a combination of
filters and modulated delay lines.
The Reverb device provides granular control of all of these factors in order to create unique spaces for
audio to travel through that range from intimate recording rooms to massive canyons, and everything
in between.
578

--- PAGE 579 ---
28.32. 1 Input Filter
Reverb’s Input Filter Section.
The input signal passes first through low and high cut filters, whose X-Y controller allows changing the
band’s center frequency (X-axis) and bandwidth (Y-axis). The filters can also be controlled using the
sliders located below the X-Y controller. Either filter may be switched off when not needed to save
CPU power.
28.32.2 Early Reflections
Reverb’s Early Reflections Section.
These are the earliest echoes that you hear after they bounce off a room’s walls, before the onset of
the diffused reverberation tail. Their amplitude and distribution give an impression of the room’s
character.
Spin applies modulation to the early reflections. The Amount and Rate sliders control the amount and
rate of these modulations respectively. A higher Amount setting tends to provide a less-colored (more
spectrally neutral) late diffusion response. If the modulation rate is too high, doppler frequency shifting
of the source sound will occur, along with surreal panning effects. Spin may be turned off, using the
associated switch, for modest CPU savings.
The Shape control sculpts the prominence of the early reflections, as well as their overlap with the
diffused sound. With small values, the reflections decay more gradually and the diffused sound occurs
579

--- PAGE 580 ---
sooner, leading to a larger overlap between these components. With large values, the reflections
decay more rapidly and the diffused onset occurs later. A higher value can sometimes improve the
source’s intelligibility, while a lower value may give a smoother decay.
28.32.3 Diffusion Network
Reverb’s Diffusion Network Section.
The Diffusion Network creates the reverberant tail that follows the early reflections.
High and low shelving filters provide frequency-dependent reverberation decay. The high-frequency
decay models the absorption of sound energy due to air, walls and other materials in the room
(people, carpeting and so forth). The low shelf provides a thinner decay. Each filter may be turned off
to save CPU consumption.
The Diffusion and Scale parameters provide additional control over the diffusion’s density and
coarseness, and, when the room size is extremely small, have a large impact on the coloration
contributed by the diffusion.
28.32.4 Chorus
Reverb’s Chorus Section.
580

--- PAGE 581 ---
The Chorus section adds a little modulation and motion to the diffusion. You can control the
modulation Amount and Rate, or deactivate it altogether.
28.32.5 Global Settings
Reverb’s Global Settings.
Predelay controls the delay time, in milliseconds, before the onset of the first early reflection. This
delays the reverberation relative to the input signal. One’s impression of the size of a real room
depends partly on this delay. Typical values for natural sounds range from 1 ms to 25 ms.
The Smooth chooser specifies the behavior of the Size parameter when its value is adjusted. If set to
None, the Diffusion Network’s delay times are changed immediately, which can cause artifacts when
changing the Size value. If set to Slow or Fast, new delay times are updated over a specific time
period, which results in a smoother sound when transitioning between values.
The Size parameter controls the room’s volume. At one extreme, a very large size will lend a shifting,
diffused delay effect to the reverb. The other extreme — a very small value — will give it a highly
colored, metallic feel.
The Decay control adjusts the time required for this reverb tail to drop to 1/1000th (-60 dB) of its
initial amplitude.
The Freeze control freezes the diffuse response of the input sound. When on, the reverberation will
sustain almost endlessly. Flat bypasses the high and low shelf filters when Freeze is on. If Flat is off, the
frozen reverberation will lose energy in the attenuated frequency bands, depending on the state of the
high and low shelving filters. Cut modifies Freeze by preventing the input signal from adding to the
frozen reverberation; when off, the input signal will contribute to the diffused amplitude.
The Stereo control determines the width of the output’s stereo image. At the highest setting of 1 20
degrees, each ear receives a reverberant channel that is independent of the other (this is also a
property of the diffusion in real rooms). The lowest setting mixes the output signal to mono.
The Density chooser controls the tradeoff between reverb quality and performance. Sparse uses
minimal CPU resources, while High delivers the richest reverberation.
58 1

--- PAGE 582 ---
28.32.6 Output
Reverb’s Output Section.
At the reverb output, you can vary the amplitude of reflections and diffusion with the Reflect and
Diffuse controls and adjust the effect’s overall Dry/Wet mix.
28.33 Roar
The Roar Effect.
Roar is a saturation and coloration device with up to three processing stages and a range of flexible
routing configurations. Its selection of non-linear shaper curves and filters can be combined to
produce a wide variety of saturation types, from targeted warmth to sweeping harmonic motion or
glitchy blasts of noise. Roar’s feedback controls and built-in compressor add a further layer of
distinctive possibility to the device, which can produce sounds unlike any other instrument or effect
currently available in Live.
582

--- PAGE 583 ---
28.33. 1 Input Section
Roar’s Input Section.
The Drive knob sets the level of the signal being input into Roar before the gain stages. It can be used
to quickly add or remove distortion without having to adjust individual Shaper Amount controls across
multiple gain stages, for example, or to modify an input signal to ensure a preset behaves as
expected.
The Tone Amount knob changes the input signal’s balance of high and low frequencies. When set to
positive values, high frequencies are boosted and low frequencies are attenuated. When set to
negative values, low frequencies are boosted and high frequencies are attenuated.
The Tone Frequency slider sets the frequency of the low shelving filter used by the Tone Amount
control.
Adjusting Roar’s Tone parameters has noticeable effects on the timbre of its gain stages, as these
follow the Input section in Roar’s processing chain. Dialing in positive values with the Tone Amount
knob can help attenuate low-frequency content in guitars or basses, for example, to avoid muddy
sounds when using large amounts of distortion.
The Color Compensation toggle next to the Tone Amount control applies a mirrored version of the
Tone filter to the output of Roar’s distortion stages. When active, Tone values are attenuated before the
shaper and boosted after it, giving you more control over the gain stage processing. Activating the
Color Compensation toggle with negative Tone values is a helpful trick for saturating drums without
affecting low end frequency impact, for example.
The Routing Mode panel lets you choose from six routing types: Single, Serial, Parallel, Multi Band,
Mid Side, and Feedback. Apart from Single and Multi Band modes, each routing mode has a Blend
control that allows you to control the blend between its two gain stages.
Serial mode processes the input signal using two concatenated shapers. The Blend control blends
between the sound of Stage 1 and the sound of Stages 1 and 2 combined.
Parallel mode processes the input signal using two independent shapers. The Blend control blends
between the sound of Stage 1 and the sound of Stage 2. To experiment with this mode, try selecting
two noticeably different Shaper Curves (like Half Wave Rectifier and Fractal) and modulating the
Blend control so that Roar’s sound shifts continuously from one to the other.
583

--- PAGE 584 ---
Multi Band mode splits the frequency spectrum into three bands (Low, Mid and High) that can each
be processed independently. Two Crossover Filters (Low and High) let you define the crossover
frequency between the three bands. This mode serves a variety of applications, including drum
processing and adding saturation to entire mixes.
Mid Side mode processes the input signal’s mono and stereo signals independently. This mode is
useful for enhancing a signal’s stereo image without compromising the sound of the signal at the
center of the stereo field.
Feedback mode processes the input signal and its feedback independently, which can create unusual
tones or transform Roar into a distinctive delay. Try modulating Roar’s Shaper Amount with an
envelope to produce saturation that has a shuffled delay effect, for example, or subtly offsetting
Shaper Bias to create delays that degrade over time.
28.33.2 Gain Stage Section
Roar’s Gain Stage Section.
Each routing mode has its own set of gain stages, which can be turned on or off independently using
the Stage toggles in the Gain Stage tabs.
Gain Stage tabs all have the same three controls: Shaper Amount, Shaper Bias, and Filter Frequency.
Shaper and Filter Types can be selected from their corresponding drop-down menus at the bottom of
each Gain Stage tab.
The Shaper Amount control sets the amount of saturation applied to the input signal. You can also click
and drag the shaper waveform in the Shaper Visualization display to modify this parameter. Distortion
occurs when the input signal reaches non-linear portions of the visualized curve.
The Shaper Bias control offsets the signal and creates asymmetrical distortion. At higher settings, it can
emulate the sound of a broken circuit. At more extreme settings, it will cause the signal to go
completely quiet.
The Shaper Type drop-down menu under the Shaper Visualization display has twelve curves to
choose from:
Soft Sine uses a sinusoidal curve to add smooth, warm saturation to the input signal. This shaper curve
tends to produce pleasant, analog-style distortion even when pushed to extreme levels.
584

--- PAGE 585 ---
Digital Clip applies a hard clipping curve to the input signal. It produces harsh, higher-order
harmonics when the input signal reaches the curve’s extremities.
Bit Crusher produces the characteristic distortion that occurs when quantized amplitudes are applied
to an input signal, similar to Live’s Redux device. Increasing the Shaper Amount reduces the number of
bits used for quantization and intensifies the effects of the bit crusher’s built-in compander. This curve
works well with bias modulation and produces very obvious changes in quieter signals.
Diode Clipper this type is a virtual analog clipping circuit emulation. It sounds smooth and warm like
the Soft Sine curve, but with attenuated high-end frequencies.
Tube Preamp models the soft, analog saturation of a tube preamp. It preserves a signal’s transients
and dynamics even when the Shaper Amount is set to higher levels.
Half Wave Rectifier and Full Wave Rectifier produce distinctive, waveshaper-style effects. Half Wave
Rectifier applies completely asymmetrical distortion to the input signal, which works well for adding
crunch to drum sounds. Full Wave Rectifier shifts the signal up by an octave, which works well for
adding harmonic depth to certain synth sounds.
Polynomial shifts between a sinusoidal curve and more complex waveforms. This shaper curve lends
itself well to modulation and to producing metallic sounds.
Fractal introduces a large of amount of high-end harmonics to the input signal.
Tri Fold this type is a triangular wavefolder. Like Fractal, it adds a large amount of high-end harmonics
to the input but achieves even harsher, more distorted results.
Noise Injection applies stereo noise followed by smooth distortion to the input signal. This curve works
well for producing smooth saturation that also has some dirt and grit.
Shards continuously changes the slope of its stereo curve segments to rhythmically break apart the
input signal.
Shapers can also be turned on or off via the toggle at the bottom of the Shaper Visualization display.
The Shaper Level control can be used to compensate for changes in output level produced as the
shaper curve is modified.
Filter Frequency adjusts the filter’s cutoff frequency. If the Pre toggle has been activated, the filter is
applied before the Shaper stage. When the Filter Frequency is changed with Pre activated, the filter
doesn’t affect the harmonics produced by the shaper.
There are eight filter types to choose from: low-pass, band-pass, high-pass, notch, peak, morph,
comb, and resampling. The Comb filter creates a series of notches across the frequency spectrum.
When its cutoff is modulated, this filter type can produce flanger-like effects. The Resampling filter
produces sample-rate reduction artifacts, similar to Live’s Redux device.
Apart from the Resampling filter, each filter has a dedicated Resonance control. The Peak filter has a
Filter Peak Gain control for boosting or attenuating a specific frequency range. The Morph filter has a
Morph control for setting its filter shape.
585

--- PAGE 586 ---
28.33.3 Modulation Section
To display Roar’s modulation parameters, click on the toggle in the Modulation panel. This will bring
up the Mod Sources and Matrix tabs.
Roar’s Modulation Toggle.
Roar’s Modulation Section.
The Mod Sources tab has four modulation sources to choose from: LFO 1, LFO 2, Env, and Noise.
Each LFO has five waveforms: three bipolar waveforms (sine, triangle, square) and two unipolar ramp
waveforms (up or down).
LFOs can be set to Free, Synced, Triplet, Dotted, or Sixteenth rates using the Mode drop-down menu.
Rate speed can be set in Hertz or tempo-synced and can be modified by clicking and dragging a
given rate up or down. Morph and Smooth controls can be changed in real time or modulated to
further sculpt LFO shapes.
The Env tab’s envelope follower generates a modulation signal based on Roar’s input signal. Attack,
Release, Threshold, Gain, Frequency, and Width controls let you hone in on the element you’d like to
isolate, even in busy sound sources. When activated, the Envelope Input Listen toggle plays back the
input signal only. Note that the Envelope Follower’s filter only affects what the envelope reacts to, not
Roar’s output signal.
The Envelope Follower is particularly useful as a modulation source in Roar’s Modulation Matrix. Try
setting it to follow a snare sound in a drum loop, for example, and have it modulate Roar’s Dry/Wet
balance or its Shaper Amount each time the snare hits.
The Noise modulation source includes four different noise types: Simplex, Wander, S & H, and Brown.
Noise curves can be set in Hertz or tempo-synced and can be smoothed like Roar’s LFO curves.
586

--- PAGE 587 ---
Simplex and Wander both generate smoothed random signals, with different random value
interpolation algorithms used to produce different signal dynamics. Simplex uses interrate modulation,
which produces a more irregular value interval than Wander. These types of noise are useful for
introducing small, random, organic-style changes in Roar’s output signal, especially when set to low
rates.
S & H (Sample and Hold) generates a random constant value that changes to a new random value at
an interval determined by the Noise Rate. This is useful for creating stepped random modulation
patterns in Roar’s output signal.
Brown produces low-pass filtered white noise, which is useful for producing a constant noise floor or
for adding crackles and hissing to Roar’s output signal.
The Matrix tab lets you assign modulation sources to modulation targets within the device. Clicking a
parameter while the Matrix tab is open will set it as a modulation target. Modulation sources are
listed horizontally and modulation targets are listed vertically. Click and drag a cell up or down to
apply modulation between parameters.
The Global Modulation Amount slider can be dragged up or down to increase or decrease the
modulation being applied globally. Clicking the X button will erase all modulation applied by the
Modulation Matrix.
The Modulation Matrix can also be expanded using the toggle in the device header. When
expanded, the device’s gain stages are all visible at once, as are all of the modulation sources and
targets in the Modulation Matrix.
Roar’s Expanded Matrix.
587

--- PAGE 588 ---
28.33.4 Feedback Section
Roar’s Feedback Section.
The Feedback section is one of Roar’s most distinctive features. Feeding Roar’s signal back into itself
can add a new layer of ringing, otherworldly tones and textures to your sound.
The Feedback Mode drop-down lets you choose between five feedback modes: Time, Synced, Triplet,
Dotted, and Note. Synced and Time modes let you use Roar’s Feedback as a delay. Note mode lets
you set the feedback’s ring to a specific pitch.
The Feedback Amount knob sets the amount of signal being fed back into Roar’s input. Because a
compressor is present in Roar’s feedback loop, loud signals will temporarily attenuate the amount of
feedback being generated as gain reduction is applied by the compressor.
When the Feedback Invert toggle is turned on, the phase of Roar’s feedback signal is inverted. The
phase cancelation effect that occurs when this inverted signal is fed back into the original creates
another layer to experiment with in Roar’s processing chain.
When the Feedback Gate toggle is turned on, Roar’s feedback automatically fades out when an input
signal is no longer being sent into the device. When turned off, Roar’s feedback continues indefinitely.
The Feedback Filter Frequency slider sets the center frequency of the band-pass filter used to process
Roar’s feedback. The Feedback Filter Width slider adjusts the filter’s bandwidth.
588

--- PAGE 589 ---
28.33.5 Global Section
Roar’s Global Section.
The Compression Amount knob sets the amount of compression being applied to the output signal,
and thereby to the signal being fed back into Roar.
When the Compressor Sidechain HP Filter toggle is turned on, a high-pass filter is applied to the
analysis signal used by the compressor’s sidechain. This is useful for lowering the amount of gain
reduction generated by the compressor’s response to low frequency signals.
The Output Gain knob sets the level of the wet signal being output, which is followed by a hard
clipping stage and then fed into the Dry/Wet stage. This parameter is useful for compensating level
changes produced by the Drive or Shaper Amount knobs.
The Dry/Wet slider adjusts the balance between the dry and wet signal being output by Roar.
589

--- PAGE 590 ---
28.34 Saturator
The Saturator Effect.
Saturator is a waveshaping effect that can add that missing dirt, punch or warmth to your sound. It
works by applying non-linear shaping to the input signal, with results ranging from soft saturation to
intense coloration.
Saturator shapes the incoming signal by mapping each individual value in the signal to a new value
according to a selected shaping curve. Because this is usually a non-linear process, the incoming
signal is dynamically reshaped based on its level at each moment in time.
You can select the curve used for shaping the input signal from the Curve Type chooser. There are
eight types to choose from: Analog Clip, Soft Sine, Bass Shaper, Medium Curve, Hard Curve, Sinoid
Fold, Digital Clip, and Waveshaper.
The available curve types offer various shaping characteristics. Digital Clip applies immediate, hard
clipping when exceeding the clipping point, while Analog Clip introduces a smoother transition
around the clipping point. These curves remain linear for signal levels below the clipping point. The
Soft Sine, Medium Curve, and Hard Curve types apply saturation with different sonic characteristic.
Sinoid Fold is a wavefolding type — as the input signal gets louder, the output folds over itself,
producing unusual textures.
The Bass Shaper curve is somewhat similar to Analog Clip, but presents a smoother harmonic
spectrum when driving low frequency signals with high gain. This makes it ideal for processing low-
end signals like 808 kick drums and synth basslines.
590

--- PAGE 591 ---
Bass Shaper includes an additional Bass Shaper Threshold control, which sets the threshold for the
curve from 0 to -50 dB. The curve remains linear when the input signal is below the threshold but
smoothly starts to clip once the signal exceeds the threshold. This allows you to move continuously
from one form of clipping to another: low threshold values produce soft clipping and high threshold
values produce hard clipping. Low threshold values work best for bass signals, especially when
combined with high Drive values.
The most dramatic signal shaping effect can be created by selecting the Waveshaper curve. This type
has its own dedicated set of controls, which are accessible by clicking the Toggle Expanded View
button in the device title bar; you can read more about how these parameters affect the signal in the
dedicated section below.
The Shaper Curve display both helps to visualize Saturator’s shaping curve and shows the input signal
in relation to the selected curve type in real time. Saturation occurs when the input signal reaches the
non-linear sections of the curve.
You can select a post-clipping stage for all the curve types using the Post Clip Mode chooser below
the Shaper Curve display. When Soft Clip or Hard Clip is selected, Saturator’s output will never
exceed the level set by the Output control. This is particularly useful for controlling any additional
boost created by negative Color values.
The Color toggle enables the device’s two color filters, which produce a color curve visualized in the
device’s expanded view. The color filters adjust an EQ curve that is first applied before the shaper,
then applied again, inverted, after the shaper. This allows you to, for example, remove bass
frequencies before the shaper, so that only mid/high frequencies are saturated and the energy of the
bass is maintained in the output.
You can use the Amt Lo slider to adjust the amount of saturation applied to low frequencies. Negative
values reduce the overall saturation applied to low frequencies, while positive values increase it.
The Drive control adjusts the gain applied to the input signal before it is processed by Saturator. You
can see how much this parameter is affecting the input signal in the device’s Shaper Curve display.
The Output control attenuates the signal level of Saturator’s final output. When Soft Clip is activated in
the Post Clip Mode chooser, Saturator will also apply an instance of the Analog Clip curve to the
device’s output.
The Dry/Wet control sets the balance between dry and processed signals in Saturator’s output. Set it
to 100% when using Saturator in a return track.
The Color Curve display in the expanded view shows a visualization of the curve being applied by
the device’s two color filters.
59 1

--- PAGE 592 ---
The Color Curve Display and Color Filter Parameters.
Below the display, there are three more controls for shaping Saturator’s color filters. Use the Amt Hi
slider to adjust the amount of saturation applied to the specified frequency range via the second filter.
Positive values add more saturation, while negative values decrease it. The Frequency slider can be
used to adjust the center frequency affected by the second color filter, while Width determines the
overall range of frequencies affected by it.
You can adjust the color filter parameters by clicking and dragging the handles in the Color Curve
display — dragging the first handle adjusts the Amt Lo parameter, while dragging the second handle
adjusts the Amt Hi or Frequency parameters, depending on whether you’re dragging the handle
horizontally or vertically.
28.34.0. 1 Saturator’s Waveshaper Controls
When you select the Waveshaper curve type, six additional parameters become active in the
expanded view.
The Waveshaper Controls.
The Waveshaper controls influence the device’s signal shaping functions in the following ways:
Drive determines how much the Waveshaper curve’s parameters affect the input signal. At 0%,
these parameters have no effect on the Waveshaper curve. At 100%, these parameters fully
shape the curve.
• 
592

--- PAGE 593 ---
Curve adds mostly third-order harmonics to the input signal.
Depth controls the amplitude of a sine wave that is superimposed onto the Waveshaper curve.
Increasing the value raises the amplitude of the sine wave, making its effect on the shaping
curve more pronounced. At 0%, the sine wave has no influence.
Linear works with the Curve and Depth parameters to alter the linear portion of the
Waveshaper curve.
Damp flattens any signals near the center of the waveform. It functions like an ultra-fast noise
gate.
Period determines the density of ripples in the superimposed sine wave in relation to the Depth
control.
28.34.0.2 Context Menu Options for Saturator
Two additional modes can be enabled in Saturator’s context menu: Hi-Quality and Pre-DC Filter. The
Hi-Quality mode reduces aliasing and improves sound quality (especially with high frequency
signals), at the cost of a slight increase in CPU usage. The Pre-DC Filter mode activates a DC filter at
Saturator’s input stage, which is useful for removing DC offsets from audio that contains them.
28.35 Shifter
The Shifter Effect.
Shifter is a multi-purpose pitch and frequency-shifting audio effect that can be used to add ring
modulation to incoming audio or to shift the pitch or frequency of audio in real time.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
593

--- PAGE 594 ---
28.35. 1 Tuning and Delay Section
Shifter’s Tuning and Delay Section.
The Coarse and Fine knobs adjust the pitch or frequency in the given value, depending on which shift
mode (explained in the Shifter Mode section) is selected.
Enabling the Wide button inverts the polarity of the Spread value for the right channel, creating a
stereo effect. This means that increasing the Spread value will shift the frequency down in the right
channel while shifting it up in the left. Note that Wide has no effect if the Spread value is set to 0.
In Pitch mode, the Window slider adjusts the window size used by the algorithm. Low frequency
signals often sound best with longer window sizes, while high frequencies often sound best with
shorter window sizes. Tone cuts the high frequencies of the delay’s feedback path.
Enabling the Delay button adds delay time that can be set using the slider control in Hertz or beat-
synced divisions, depending on which Delay Mode button you select. The Delay Feedback knob sets
the amount of the output that is fed back to the input of the delay.
594

--- PAGE 595 ---
28.35.2 LFO Section
Shifter’s LFO Section.
You can modulate the left and right stereo channels using Shifter’s LFO.
In the LFO waveform display, you can set the Duty Cycle and Phase/Spin/Width controls. Duty
Cycle sets the duty cycle of the LFO waveform. Phase adjusts the offset between the waveforms for the
left and right channel. At 1 80° the LFOs will be perfectly out of phase. Depending on the LFO
waveform or the Rate parameter, Phase may be replaced by a Spin or Width control, as explained
below.
When the Rate parameter (as described in further detail below) is set to beat-synced time divisions,
you will see the Offset parameter next to the Phase parameter, which shifts the starting point of each
LFO along its waveform.
There are several different LFO waveforms to choose from the LFO drop-down menu: Sine, Triangle,
Triangle Analog, Triangle 8, Triangle 16, Saw Up, Saw Down, Rectangle, Random, and Random
S&H.
The LFO waveforms Sine, Triangle, Triangle Analog, Triangle 8, Triangle 16, Saw Up, Saw Down, and
Rectangle can also be set to Spin instead of Phase. Spin detunes the two LFO speeds relative to one
another.
The LFO waveforms Random and Random S&H can only be set to Phase and Width, respectively.
Width adjusts the Stereo width of the random LFO waveform. At 0%, the waveform is identical for the
left and right channels. At 100%, the waveform is fully stereo, peaks on the left will correspond to
valleys on the right and vice versa.
LFO modulation is controlled with the Rate parameter, which can be set in Hertz or synced to the song
tempo and set in meter subdivisions (e.g. sixteenth notes). The Amount parameter sets the amount of
LFO modulation that is applied to incoming signals.
595

--- PAGE 596 ---
28.35.3 Envelope Follower Section
Shifter’s Envelope Follower.
Shifter’s envelope follower uses the amplitude from an incoming audio signal and translates it to a
modulation source.
The Envelope Attack sets how quickly the envelope follower responds to rising input levels and the
Envelope Release sets how quickly the envelope follower responds to falling input levels.
The Env Fol button switches on Shifter’s envelope follower. The Amount adjusts the intensity of the
envelope follower’s modulation. The Amount value can be set in semitones in Pitch mode or in Hertz in
the Freq and Ring modes.
28.35.4 Shifter Mode Section
The Shifter Mode Section.
596

--- PAGE 597 ---
Three different Shifter Mode button switches are available: Pitch, Freq, and Ring.
Pitch mode adjusts the pitch of incoming audio up or down by a user-specified amount in semitones
(Coarse tuning) and cents (Fine tuning).
Freq mode moves the frequencies of incoming audio up or down by a user-specified amount in Hertz.
Small amounts of shift can result in subtle tremolo or phasing effects, while large shifts can create
dissonant, metallic sounds.
In Ring mode, the user-specified frequency amount in Hertz is added to and subtracted from the input.
Drive enables a distortion effect, and the slider below it controls the level of the distortion. Note: Drive
is only available in Ring mode.
The Dry/Wet knob sets the balance between the dry and processed signals at Shifter’s output.
28.35.5 Sidechain Parameters
Shifter’s Sidechain Parameters.
To access the Sidechain parameters, unfold the Shifter window by toggling the triangle button on the
left of the title bar. There are two Pitch Modes available that determine how the pitch or frequency is
set: Internal and MIDI. In Internal mode, the pitch or frequency is set by Shifter’s Coarse and Fine
knobs. In MIDI mode, the pitch or frequency is set by an incoming MIDI note.
In MIDI mode, you will see a drop-down menu where you can select an external MIDI source. There
is also a Glide parameter that adjusts the time in milliseconds over which it takes notes to slide their
pitch to the next incoming pitch. You can set a pitch bend range between 0-24 semitones to define the
effect of MIDI pitch bend messages using the PB slider.
597

--- PAGE 598 ---
28.35.6 Shifter Tips
28.35.6. 1 Pitch-shifted Drum Layers
To add glitchy, metallic echoes to a drum loop, duplicate your drum track and add Shifter after the
Drum Rack. In Pitch mode, try adjusting or automating the Coarse knob and enable the Delay button.
Higher pitch shifts will create a metallic and crisp echoed delay. Lower pitch shifts will create a
drawn-out delay effect. You can lower the volume of the pitch-shifted track so that it sits in the
background, adding some movement to the main drum track.
28.35.6.2 Phasing Effects
To create lush phasing effects, minimally adjust (no more than 2 Hz or so) the Fine knob in Freq mode.
Phasing is caused by the interaction of the processed and dry signals; you can adjust the Mix balance
so that both are audible. The strongest phasing will be heard when MIx is at 50%.
28.35.6.3 Tremolo Effects
In Ring mode, frequencies below the audible range (about 20 Hz or slightly lower) create a tremolo
effect. You can also impart a sense of stereo motion to the tremolo by turning on Wide and using small
Spread values.
28.36 Spectral Resonator
The Spectral Resonator Effect.
Based on spectral processing, Spectral Resonator uses spectral resonances and pitched overtones to
add tonal character to any audio source. You can highlight chosen frequencies of the resonating
partials and alter their decay, creating either short percussive reverberations or long washed-out
tones. Choose which frequencies are affected through an internal resonator or via an external MIDI
sidechain. Similar to a vocoder, you can use the MIDI input to place the resonances in key with its
598

--- PAGE 599 ---
surrounding musical elements, playing the effect polyphonically with up to 16 voices. Spectral
Resonator also offers several spectral processing types on the input signal, including spectral filtering,
spectral chorus, and granularization.
Spectral Resonator uses a spectrogram to display how frequencies in the dry and wet signals behave
over time. Dry signals are represented in yellow, while wet signals are shown in blue. You can hide the
visualization by clicking on its toggle button.
On the left side of the device, you will find the Pitch Mode section. Different controls are available
depending on whether Internal mode or MIDI mode is selected.
When Internal mode is enabled, Spectral Resonator will be tuned to the frequency set by the Freq dial.
The frequency can be set either in Hertz or to a specific pitch; to toggle between the two options, use
the Frequency Dial Mode buttons. Note that the MIDI mode controls are disabled in Internal mode.
When MIDI mode is enabled, Spectral Resonator can be tuned to the frequencies of incoming MIDI
notes. When MIDI mode is enabled, the MIDI router, Mono/Poly switch, Polyphony control, MIDI
Gate, Glide and Pitch Bend range controls are also enabled.
The MIDI router allows you to choose any MIDI track as a source. To use an external MIDI controller,
use the “MIDI From” chooser on any MIDI track to select your MIDI controller. Then, in Spectral
Resonator, choose the track with the selected MIDI controller in the “MIDI From” drop-down chooser.
The MIDI input can be transposed using the Transpose dial (displayed as “Transp. “) with a range of
+/- 48 semitones.
The Mono/Poly switch enables polyphony for incoming MIDI, enabling you to send polyphonic
material such as chords to Spectral Resonator. You can choose between 2, 4, 8, or 16 voices in the
Polyphony chooser. The number of harmonics set by the Harmonics control are evenly distributed
between the voices, resulting in fewer harmonics per voice when high voice counts are used. The
combination of high Polyphony and Unison values will create a darker sound.
When the MIDI Gate button is deactivated, audio input will still excite the resonator, even when no
MIDI notes are playing. When activated, the device behaves more like an instrument, and will only
resonate while MIDI notes are being played. In Polyphonic mode, MIDI Gate is always active, so you
will need to play MIDI notes to produce sound.
The Glide parameter adjusts the time in milliseconds over which it takes notes to slide their pitch to the
next incoming pitch. Note that this is only active in Mono mode. The PB parameter defines the effect of
MIDI pitch bend messages, allowing a range of 0-24 semitones. Note that Spectral Resonator is also
able to receive MPE.
The Harmonics parameter (in the upper right corner of the spectrogram) changes the number of
harmonics. More harmonics will lead to a brighter sound and fewer to a darker sound. Note also that
a higher number of harmonics increases the CPU usage.
Stretch increases or decreases the spacing between the harmonics. Values below 0 will compress the
distance, while values above 0 will stretch it. At 100%, only odd harmonics are created, which leads
to a square-wave type sound.
599

--- PAGE 600 ---
Shift transposes the input signal’s spectrum up or down within a range of +/- 48 semitones. Note that
this does not shift the spectrum of the actual effect, but rather the spectrum of the signal which is fed to
the effect.
Decay adjusts the decay time in milliseconds. A higher value leads to sustained tones. HF Damp sets
the amount of damping applied to high frequency partials. LF Damp sets the amount of damping
applied to low frequency partials.
For both HF Damp and LF Damp, the frequencies affected by the control shift with the pitch of the Freq
knob (when in Internal mode), or with any incoming MIDI notes (when in MIDI mode).
Using the available switches, you can choose between four Modulations Modes: None, Chorus,
Wander, and Granular. These modes determine how each individual harmonic’s pitch and amplitude
are modulated:
None applies no modulation.
Chorus applies triangle wave modulation for every partial. When Mod Rate is set to 0, this
mode only modulates the amplitudes of the partials.
Wander uses random sawtooth waveforms as the modulation source for each partial.
Granular modulates the amplitude of all partials randomly, using exponential decay envelopes.
The partials are generated at random and, in this mode, the Mod Rate parameter affects the
density of the partials.
Both Wander and Granular modes will affect each individual Unison voice, creating very warbly,
dense and indistinct sounds.
All Modulation Modes are also affected by the Mod Rate and Pch. Mod (pitch modulation)
parameters. Mod Rate sets the modulation rate, while Pch. Mod adjusts the range of pitch modulation
in semitones. Though Pch. Mod displays only a positive value, pitch modulation is applied in both a
positive and negative direction (except in Granular mode, where the grain envelopes are only
applied in a positive direction).
The Input Send dial sets the amount of gain applied to the processed signal. There is also a built-in
limiter, to ensure that no signal gets too loud. The LED next to the Input Send dial will light up if the
limiter is in use.
The Unison parameter allows you to choose 1, 2, 4, or 8 voices, while Unison Amount (displayed as
“Uni. Amt”) adjusts the intensity of the unison effect. A higher Unison value increases the number of
voices, and increasing the Unison Amount causes the voices to become further detuned from each
other.
The Dry/Wet adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals and modifies the visibility of
the two signals in the spectrogram. Set Dry/Wet to 100% when using Spectral Resonator in a return
track.
• 
• 
• 
• 
600

--- PAGE 601 ---
28.36. 1 Spectral Resonator Tips
Here are some tips for using Spectral Resonator:
Create tonal drum loops by placing Spectral Resonator on a drum track and using the MIDI
sidechain input to feed specific pitches to Spectral Resonator. This can be used to add rhythm to
your track with the same pitches as your bass, for example.
In order to have Spectral Resonator follow the pitches of melodic material, first use the Convert
Harmony to New MIDI Track or the Convert Melody to New MIDI Track command, then send
the generated MIDI track to Spectral Resonator.
Create reverb-type sounds by setting Frequency to a low value, setting Unison and Unison
Amount to a high value, and use the Wander modulation mode in combination with low Mod
Rate and Pch. Mod values. Adjust the Decay parameter to make the “reverb” decay longer or
shorter.
Vocal processing - Spectral Resonator can be used like a vocoder by simply using your voice
as the audio to be processed in combination with the MIDI sidechain input.
Use two Spectral Resonators in series to create overlapping harmonics by sending different
MIDI signals to each of the Spectral Resonators.
28.37 Spectral Time
The Spectral Time Effect.
Spectral Time combines time freezing and spectral delay effects in a single inspiring device. You can
resynthesize your sounds by applying various spectral filters, delays and frequency-shifting techniques
to incoming material, creating highly varied and unique copies. The freeze and delay effects can be
used together or independently, allowing for a wide range of possibilities, such as sustaining any
sound infinitely, or combining delays with time-synced fade transitions. You can easily transform
sounds by smearing frequencies over time, or add metallic echoes and space to any sound source.
Spectral Time has two main sections, Freezer and Delay, which can be used individually or serially,
with the freezer feeding the delay. You can toggle the individual sections using the Freezer On and
Delay On buttons.
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
601

--- PAGE 602 ---
Spectral Time uses a spectrogram to display how frequencies in the dry and wet signals behave over
time. Dry signals are represented in yellow, while wet signals are shown in blue. You can hide the
visualization by clicking on its toggle button.
From Spectral Time’s context menu, you can switch Zero Dry Signal Latency on or off. Enabling it
reduces the latency of the dry signal to zero instead of syncing it with the output of the effect. This
option is useful when playing a live instrument through Spectral Time and monitoring the output.
28.37 . 1 Freezer Section
Spectral Time’s Freezer Section.
Depending on which of the Manual/Retrigger Mode buttons are activated, the Freezer section
controls how the freeze function is triggered and how certain temporal characteristics of the frozen
audio are affected. Note that for both modes, the Freeze button also has to be toggled in order for the
effect to occur.
In Manual mode, audio can be frozen by clicking on the Freeze button. You can also control the Fade
In and Fade Out time of the frozen signal in milliseconds.
In Retrigger mode, you have more controls to fine-tune the rhythm of the frozen audio, which can be
frozen automatically at every transient (onset), or at regular intervals.
Onsets mode will freeze the audio after a transient is detected in the input. Use the Sensitivity knob to
adjust the sensitivity of onset detection. Sensitivity is highest at 100% and lowest at 0%.
Sync mode will freeze the audio at regular intervals, determined by the Interval control. By toggling
the Freezer Time Unit buttons, the Interval control can be set to either milliseconds or beat-time values.
In both Onsets and Sync modes, the Freezer Fade Shape buttons toggle between two available fade
shapes: Crossfade and Envelope. Both fade shapes have different controls to determine how a new
freeze will fade in and out.
When the Crossfade shape is selected, the new freeze will fade in and the old freeze (or dry signal)
will fade out. The crossfade duration is set by the X-Fade control, which specifically determines the
time in milliseconds over which a new freeze will fade in as a percentage of the sync interval set by
the Interval control.
602

--- PAGE 603 ---
When the Envelope shape is selected, a new freeze will fade in and out according to the millisecond
time values chosen in the Fade In and Fade Out parameters. In this mode, up to eight simultaneous
freezes can be stacked on top of one another.
28.37 .2 Delay Section
Spectral Time’s Delay Section.
The Delay section of Spectral Time can be activated or deactivated with the Delay toggle button and
allows you to create delayed copies of spectral information. If the Freezer section is enabled, the
Delay section will be fed by the Freezer’s output.
The Time parameter controls the delay time for the spectral delay lines. The type of value shown here
is dependent on the unit type chosen in the “Mode” drop-down chooser:
Time mode adjusts the delay time in milliseconds.
Notes adjusts delay time in beat divisions.
16th, 16th Triplet, and 16th Dotted set the delay time to the number of the chosen type of 16th
notes.
Feedback sets the amount of output that is fed back to the delay input. Turning this up increases the
audible echoes of the signal.
Shift shifts the frequency of the delayed signals. Each successive delay will be shifted up or down by
the specified frequency amount.
Stereo adjusts the width of the Tilt and Spray controls.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the delayed and dry signals. Note that this only
affects the Delay section of the device.
Tilt skews the delay times for different frequencies. A positive value will delay high frequencies more
than low frequencies, while a negative value delays low frequencies more than high frequencies.
Spray distributes the delay times for different frequencies randomly within the given time range.
Mask limits the effects of the Tilt and Spray controls to either high or low frequencies. Positive values
limit the effects to high frequencies, while negative values limit the effects to low frequencies.
• 
• 
• 
603

--- PAGE 604 ---
28.37 .3 Resolution Section
Spectral Time’s Resolution Control.
In the upper right corner of the spectrogram display, you will find the Resolution control, which sets the
resolution used to process the incoming signal. Lower values reduce the overall latency at the cost of
accuracy and fidelity. Note that since higher values affect overall latency, you may wish to reduce the
Resolution while tracking.
28.37 .4 Global Controls
Spectral Time’s Global Controls.
Input Send adjusts the gain of the input signal.
The two radio buttons Frz > Dly and Dly > Frz reverse the effect order.
The global Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals. Set it to
100% when using Spectral Time in a return track.
604

--- PAGE 605 ---
28.38 Spectrum
The Spectrum Device.
Spectrum performs real-time frequency analysis of incoming audio signals. The results are represented
in a graph, with dB along the vertical axis and frequency/pitch along the horizontal. The peak levels
are retained on the graph until the song is restarted. Note that Spectrum is not an audio effect, but
rather a measurement tool — it does not alter the incoming signal in any way.
The Block chooser selects the number of samples that will be analyzed in each measurement. Higher
values result in better accuracy, but at the expense of increased CPU load.
Channel determines which channel is analyzed — left, right or both.
The Refresh slider determines how often Spectrum should perform an analysis. As with the Block
parameter, this allows for a tradeoff between accuracy and CPU load. A fast response time is more
accurate, but also more CPU intensive.
The Avg slider allows you to specify how many blocks of samples will be averaged for each update
of the display. With a setting of one, each block is shown. This results in much more activity in the
display, which can be useful for finding the spectrum of short peaks. As you increase the Avg value,
the display updates more smoothly, providing an average of the spectrum over time. This is more
consistent with the way we actually hear.
The Graph button switches between displaying the spectrum as a single interpolated line and discrete
frequency bins.
Max toggles the display of the accumulated maximum amplitude. With Max enabled, you can reset
the maximum amplitude by clicking in the display.
The Scale X buttons allow you to toggle the scaling of the frequency display between linear,
logarithmic, and semitone. Note that logarithmic and semitone are actually the same scaling, but
605

--- PAGE 606 ---
switch the legending at the top of the display between Hertz and note names. Linear scaling is
particularly useful for detailed analysis of high frequencies.
As you move your mouse over Spectrum’s display, a box appears that shows the amplitude,
frequency and note name at the pointer’s position. The Range/Auto button at the bottom left of
Spectrum’s interface toggles between manually and automatically adjusting the display’s dynamic
range. With Range selected, you can zoom and scroll the amplitude by moving your mouse over the
amplitude legending on the display’s left side. Drag vertically to scroll and horizontally to zoom. You
can also use the Range sliders to set the minimum and maximum amplitude values shown. With Auto
selected, the display automatically scales itself based on the incoming audio level. Note that in Auto
mode, the Range sliders and zooming are disabled.
To get an even better view, you can toggle the location of the display between the device chain and
Live’s main window by clicking the  button in Spectrum’s title bar or by double-clicking in the
display.
28.39 Tuner
The Tuner Device.
Tuner analyzes and displays the incoming monophonic pitch as well as its distance from the nearest
semitone. Based on classic guitar tuners, Tuner’s large display is designed for easy visibility on stage,
and is perfect for tuning external instruments or synthesizers.
It is important to note that Tuner is not an audio effect, but rather a measurement tool – it does not
alter the incoming signal in any way. Tuner is designed to analyze monophonic pitches, and works
606

--- PAGE 607 ---
best with a clean, clear signal. Polyphonic, noisy, or harmonically rich signals may yield inaccurate
results.
28.39. 1 View Switches
The two buttons in the lower-left switch between Tuner’s two main views. Classic View resembles
conventional analog tuners while Histogram View shows pitch over time. In both views, the display
uses color to help indicate tuning accuracy. Green means in tune, while red means out of tune.
Tuner’s View Switches.
28.39.2 Classic View
In Classic View, the incoming pitch is represented as a colored ball along a curve, and the nearest
detected note name is shown in the center of the display. The arrows on either side of the note name
light up to indicate whether the signal needs to be tuned higher or lower in order to reach the desired
pitch.
In Target Mode, a circular outline in the center of the curve shows the desired pitch, and your signal is
in tune if the colored ball is exactly within this outline. If the incoming signal is sharp, the ball will
appear to the right of the target, while flat signals will appear to the left.
607

--- PAGE 608 ---
Tuner in Target Mode.
In Strobe Mode, the curve becomes a rotating band of lights. The direction of rotation indicates
whether the signal is sharp or flat. If the band rotates to the right, the incoming pitch is sharp, while flat
signals cause the band to rotate to the left. The further your signal is out of tune, the faster the band will
move.
Tuner in Strobe Mode.
The Hertz/Cents Switch toggles between showing the absolute frequency of the incoming signal in
Hertz or the distance from the target pitch in cents. This switch is also visible in the Histogram View.
608

--- PAGE 609 ---
28.39.3 Histogram View
In Histogram View, pitch is shown over time. The scale on the right of the display shows the possible
note names, and the horizontal gray bars represent the perfectly in-tune “center” of the associated
note. Sharp notes will appear above their corresponding gray line, while flat notes will appear below
it.
Tuner in Histogram View.
Drag up or down in the display to scroll to different pitches, or drag horizontally to zoom in or out.
With Auto enabled, the display will automatically adjust so that the incoming pitch is in the center of
the display.
The Hertz/Cents Switch toggles between showing the absolute frequency of the incoming signal in
Hertz or the distance from the target pitch in cents. This switch is also visible in the Classic View.
609

--- PAGE 610 ---
28.39.4 Note Spellings
Tuner’s Note Spellings.
The Tuner device includes three options for note spellings. You can access a menu with these options
when you right-click anywhere within Tuner’s view display:
Sharps (C#)
Flats (D♭)
Sharps and Flats (C#/D♭)
• 
• 
• 
6 10

--- PAGE 611 ---
28.39.5 Reference Slider
Tuner’s Reference Slider.
The Reference slider allows you to change the tuning reference that Tuner uses when analyzing
incoming signals. By default this is set to 440 Hz, which is “standard” concert tuning, but it can be
changed to any value between 410-480 Hz.
6 1 1

--- PAGE 612 ---
28.40 Utility
The Utility Effect.
Utility can perform some very useful tasks, especially in combination with other devices.
There are two separate Phase controls, one for each input channel (Left and Right). As their names
imply, they invert the phase of each channel.
The Channel Mode chooser allows selective processing of the left and right channels of a sample. If,
for example, Left is selected, the right channel is ignored and the left channel appears on both
outputs. This is especially useful if you have a stereo file that contains different information on both
channels and you want to use only one.
The Width control sets the stereo width of the wet signal. 0% yields a mono signal whereas values
above 100% create a widened stereo panorama.
Choosing Mid/Side Mode from the Width control’s context menu allows you to you toggle between
the Width and Mid/Side controls. The Mid/Side control acts as a continuous mono to stereo
controller when set from 0 to 100M. Setting the parameter to 100M will sum the audio to mono.
Values between 0 and 100S emphasize the stereo or “out of phase” components of a signal. At
100S, only the side signal will be heard. The left and right channels will be 1 80 degrees out of phase
with each other.
Note that if either Left or Right have been chosen in the Channel Mode chooser, the Width and Mid/
Side controls have no function, and are therefore disabled.
When the Mono switch is enabled, the stereo input signal is converted to mono.
6 1 2

--- PAGE 613 ---
The Bass Mono switch converts the low frequencies of the input signal to mono. This is useful for
avoiding coloration of low frequencies when they are replayed in mono. You can use the Bass Mono
Frequency slider to adjust the cutoff frequency between 50-500 Hz.
When Bass Mono Audition is enabled, only the low frequencies can be heard. This can be useful for
tuning the Bass Mono Frequency.
The Gain control adjusts the level of the input signal from -infinite dB to +35 dB. This can be
particularly useful for automating volume fades on a track, while freeing up that track’s Volume control
for mix balancing. When adjusting the Gain parameter between -1 8 and +35 dB using the up and
down arrow keys, the value increases or decreases in 1 dB increments. However, between -1 8 dB
and -inf dB, the value smoothly accelerates.
The Balance control pans the signal anywhere in the stereo field.
The Mute button simply silences the incoming signal when enabled. The active/mute controls of a
track are always placed at the very end of the signal chain. However, since you can place Utility
anywhere in a signal chain, you can use its mute function to cut the input of a delay line or reverb
without turning off the output of these devices.
The DC switch filters out DC offsets and extremely low frequencies that are far below the audible
range. It will only have a sonic effect if a signal contains these frequencies and is processed after
Utility with nonlinear effects such as compressors or waveshapers.
6 1 3

--- PAGE 614 ---
28.41 Vinyl Distortion
The Vinyl Distortion Effect.
The Vinyl Distortion effect emulates some of the typical distortions that occur on vinyl records during
playback. These distortions are caused by the geometric relationships between the needle and the
recorded groove. The effect also features a crackle generator for adding noisy artifacts.
The Tracing Model section adds even harmonic distortion to the input signal. Adjust the amount of
distortion with the Drive knob, or click and drag vertically in the Tracing Model X-Y display. To adjust
the distortion’s frequency or ”color,” drag horizontally in the X-Y display or double-click on the Freq
field and type in a value. Holding the Alt (Win) / Option (Mac) modifier while dragging
vertically in the X-Y display changes the frequency band’s Q (bandwidth).
The Pinch Effect section adds odd harmonics to the input signal. These distortions typically occur 1 80
degrees out of phase, creating a richer stereo image. The Pinch Effect has the same controls as the
Tracing Model, but generates a rather different sound.
The Drive control increases or decreases the overall distortion amount created by both the Tracing
Model and Pinch.
There are two distortion modes: Soft and Hard. The Soft Mode simulates the sound of a dub plate,
while Hard Mode is more like that of a standard vinyl record.
The stereo/mono switch determines whether the Pinch distortion occurs in stereo or mono. Set it to
stereo for realistic simulation of vinyl distortions.
6 1 4

--- PAGE 615 ---
The Crackle section adds noise to the signal, with noise density set by the Density control. The Volume
control adjusts the amount of gain applied to the noise.
28.42 Vocoder
The Vocoder Effect.
(Note: The Vocoder effect is not available in the Intro and Lite Editions.)
A vocoder is an effect that combines the frequency information of one audio signal (called the carrier)
with the amplitude contour of another audio signal (called the modulator). The modulator source is
generally something with a clear rhythmic character such as speech or drums, while the carrier is
typically a harmonically-rich synthesizer sound such as a string or pad. The most familiar application
of a vocoder is to create ”talking synthesizer” or robotic voice effects.
Vocoders work by running both the carrier and modulator signals through banks of band-pass filters.
The output level of each of the modulator’s filters is then analyzed and used to control the volume of
the corresponding filter for the carrier signal.
Live’s Vocoder should be inserted on the track that contains the audio material you plan to use as your
modulator. The Carrier chooser then provides a variety of options for the carrier signal:
Noise uses Vocoder’s internal noise generator as the carrier source. With this selected, an X-Y
display is shown which allows you to adjust the character of the noise. The horizontal axis
adjusts downsampling. Click and drag to the left to decrease the sample rate of the carrier’s
output. The vertical axis adjusts the density of the noise. Click and drag downward to decrease
the density.
External allows you to select any available internal routing points from the choosers below. This
is the option you’ll want for classic ”robot voice” applications.
Modulator uses the modulator itself as the carrier. This essentially outputs a resynthesized
version of the modulator signal, but allows you to use Vocoder’s sound-shaping controls to
adjust the sound.
• 
• 
• 
6 1 5

--- PAGE 616 ---
Pitch Tracking enables a monophonic oscillator, which tunes itself to the pitch of the modulator.
The High and Low sliders allow you to limit the frequency range that the oscillator will attempt
to track. Choose from sawtooth or one of three pulse waveforms and adjust the coarse tuning of
the oscillator via the Pitch slider. Pitch tracking is particularly effective with monophonic
modulator sources such as melodic instruments or voices. Note that the oscillator only updates
its frequency when it detects a clear pitch. It then maintains this pitch until it detects a new one.
This means that changing the oscillator’s parameters or causing it to reset (when grouping
Vocoder’s track, for example) can cause unexpected changes in the sound. With polyphonic
material or drums, pitch tracking is generally unpredictable (but can be very interesting.)
Particularly when using external carrier sources, a vocoder’s output can sometimes lose a lot of high
end. Enabling the Enhance button results in a brighter sound by normalizing the spectrum and
dynamics of the carrier.
The Unvoiced knob adjusts the volume of an additional noise generator, which is used to resynthesize
portions of the modulator signal that are pitchless, such as ”f” and ”s” sounds.
Sens. sets the sensitivity of the unvoiced detection algorithm. At 100%, the unvoiced noise generator is
always on. At 0%, only the main carrier source is used. The Fast/Slow switch adjusts how quickly
Vocoder switches between unvoiced and voiced detection.
Vocoder’s large central area shows the levels of the individual band-pass filters. Clicking within this
display allows you to attenuate these levels.
The Bands chooser sets the number of filters that will be used. Using more bands results in a more
accurate analysis of the modulator’s frequency content, but requires more CPU.
The Range sliders adjust the frequency range over which the band-pass filters will operate. For most
sources, a fairly large range works well, but you may want to adjust the outer limits if the sound
becomes too piercing or bassy. The BW control sets the bandwidth of the filters. At low percentages,
each filter approaches a single frequency. As you increase the bandwidth, you increase the overlap
of the filter bands. A bandwidth of 100% is the most accurate, but higher or lower settings can create
interesting effects.
The Precise/Retro switch toggles between two types of filter behavior. In Precise mode, all filters have
the same gain and bandwidth. In Retro mode, bands become narrower and louder at higher
frequencies.
Gate sets a threshold for the filterbank. Any bands whose levels are below the threshold will be silent.
The Level slider boosts or cuts Vocoder’s output.
Depth sets how much of the modulator’s amplitude envelope is applied to the carrier’s signal. At 0%,
the modulator’s envelope is discarded. At 200%, only high amplitude peaks will be used. 100%
results in ”classic” vocoding.
The Attack and Release controls set how quickly Vocoder responds to amplitude changes in the
modulator signal. Very fast times preserve the transients of the modulator, but can cause distortion
artifacts.
• 
6 16

--- PAGE 617 ---
The Mono/Stereo switches determine how many channels are used for the carrier and modulator. In
Mono mode, both the carrier and modulator are treated as mono sources. Stereo uses a mono
modulator but processes the carrier in stereo. L/R processes both the carrier and modulator signals in
stereo.
The frequencies of the carrier’s filterbank can be shifted up or down via the Formant knob. With voice
as the modulator, small Formant changes can alter the apparent gender of the source.
The Dry/Wet control adjusts the balance between the processed and dry signals.
28.42. 1 Vocoder Tips
This section explains how to set up the most common Vocoder applications.
28.42. 1. 1 Singing Synthesizer
The classic vocoder application is the ”singing synthesizer.” To set this up in Live:
Insert Vocoder in the track that contains your vocal material. You can either use a clip that
contains a prerecorded voice clip or, to process a live vocal signal, connect a microphone to a
channel on your audio hardware and choose this as the input source for the track.
Insert a synthesizer such as Analog in another track. Again, you can either create a MIDI clip to
drive this synthesizer or play it live.
Set the vocoder’s Carrier chooser to External.
Select the synthesizer track in the vocoder’s Audio From choosers. (For best results, choose Post
FX in the bottom chooser.)
If you’re creating your synthesizer and vocal material in real time, make sure the Arm button is
enabled on both tracks.
Play the synthesizer as you speak into the microphone. You’ll hear the rhythm of your speech,
but with the timbral character and frequencies of the synthesizer. To hear the vocoded signal
alone, solo the voice track so that the ”normal” synthesizer track is muted.
Note: you’ll generally get the best results if your synthesizer sound is bright and rich in harmonics. Try
sawtooth-based patches to improve the intelligibility of the voice. For even more brightness and
clarity, try adjusting the Unvoiced control and/or enabling Enhance.
28.42. 1.2 Formant Shifter
If the Vocoder is set to use the modulator as its own carrier, it can be used as a powerful formant
shifter. To do this:
Set the Carrier chooser to Modulator.
Set the Depth to 100%.
Enable Enhance.
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
6 1 7

--- PAGE 618 ---
Now experiment with different settings of the Formant knob to alter the character of the source. For
even more sound-sculpting possibilities, try adjusting the various filterbank parameters as well.
6 1 8
